The presentation Susan Philips provided for the class last Tuesday was really eye-opening. In her book and short film “In the heart of another, titled after a famous Persian proverb, she explores the lives and stories of a diverse group of immigrants and their families. The main questions that she was asking had to do with happiness and reasons for immigration from their home country to America. The movie that we watched was created for middle-high schoolers, but it was still very watchable, enjoyable, and informative. We learned about Mexican immigrants who lived a wholesome and fulfilling life here in America. One of the immigrants had a daughter who was diagnosed with Polio when she was younger. She would’ve never had the opportunity to drive a car or live a normal life in Mexico, but thanks to disability accessibility and modified cars here in America, she was able to live a full life. We hear many more stories about similar immigrants with positive stories about moving to America, and many of them go on to be productive and peaceful members of society. The purpose of this video was to give a face and voice to immigrants who are consistently being attacked by politicians and the media. We continuously hear rumors that immigrants take our jobs, are violent criminals, and engage in drug use and dealing, but this is all a misconception. We must be able to document these stories and memories of recent and long-time immigrants in order to have a better understanding of diversity and the struggles of minorities. One questionable part of the video is the fact that some of the immigrants that were being interviewed came to America illegally. This raised some serious questions in my mind because, to a certain extent, we are celebrating and rewarding a divisive crime that would be considered treasonous to many in this country. Personally, I disagree with aspects of current immigration policy, so the fact that these illegal immigrants are thriving doesn’t bother me. If we can learn something about illegal migrants from this study, it should be that they are substantial and contributing human beings as well. They are intelligent individuals with a lot to offer this country, and many would argue that this country was built on the backs of “illegal” or unfair labor. As a nation, we should be willing to accept that immigrants help construct and elevate our society, so we must welcome them with open arms and understand a better way to integrate them into our community.