My views on immigration did not change that much after the discussion with Ms. Philips. This is probably because I am able to relate to many of these women and the difficulties of assimilating to a different culture as I am an immigrant myself. I was, however, a little surprised how people had to give up promising careers to do more menial jobs because of the circumstances in their country. It made me realize the severity of living conditions for so many other people. I think what surprised me the most was the situations these women were in while living in their home country. Seeing how they gave up their careers as doctors to come and work in factories made me realize how bad it really was where they lived. I was really impressed with their resilience. Hearing the teacher say that she missed her career but had to work no matter what the job was made me realize their reality. I identified with Michelle Garcia the most. While she was born here, she identifies as Mexican American and is heavily in touch with her culture. As a person who has been brought up in America since I was a year old, I feel like I never experienced what it was like to live a life in India, but I still heavily identify and associate with my Indian culture. I also visit India a lot, similar to how Michelle travels to and from Mexico. I think after reading the stories, I wondered what life would have been like if I lived in India. I don’t think I would ever really know as I have never experienced life in India for periods longer than 2 months. I think I would be able to adapt well, however, because I am very in touch with my culture and traditions, and I am fluent in my native language. I am an immigrant. I was born in Tamil Nadu in South India. I moved to the US when I was a year old in 2006. At that time, it was just my parents and myself. My father had found a new job at a tech company in San Diego and was fortunate enough to pursue the same career he was in back in India. In 2009, after my sister was born, my father got a new job and we moved to Los Angeles and I have been living here ever since. I would consider myself to be completely brought up in America. I’ve attended school here since I was in preschool, made American friends, and grew up in a household that had an Indian and American culture influence. I think initially, it was a little difficult for me and my family to assimilate to American culture due to language and lifestyle differences. However, due to my young age, and that of my parents, I was able to quickly adapt. Because I have been here most of my life, I don’t feel like an immigrant or feel like I have experienced any of the struggles many immigrants who move here later in their life experience.