My views on immigration changed extensively because I didn’t understand the struggle coming from a second generation Asian American household. I always thought that it would be easy or not too difficult to find opportunity in America because of the nature of the nation. However, I didn’t consider the challenges like the language barrier and the acclimation from past experiences/life to the present for these immigrants. It makes me appreciate the pain that my mom went through when she immigrated to the United States. Additionally, it made me understand more why the work ethic for immigrant households is so high and why my mom pushes me so hard. It makes sense given her context. I was surprised that the women were so open to sharing about their past struggles as well as open up emotionally. From a human perspective, it shows how much pain and struggle there is in others’ situations around the world. It gives me context about the lives of others that I often don’t notice when I’m living out my daily life. I identify with Nara because of her raw feelings on how she wishes that she could go back to her old way of living. The reason why she felt so strongly about her old occupation even after being able to make a living in the United States is that she once lived a life that was so much better and understandable in her home country. Now that it was taken away from her, she looks back and wonders if she’ll ever be able to experience the same occupation and the same livelihood. For me, I see it the same way, as when we are born and raised as children we have a glimpse of an innocent, blameless life. However once we grow up we face many issues that come with adulthood, and we yearn to go back into that blamelessness. That’s why I resonate with being able to live a better life in the past but being faced with current trials. After reading the stories, the questions that I ask myself are how the United States can effectively support immigrants and the immigrant population currently living in the United States. I think one answer to the question is to inform American Citizens about the harsh lives and backgrounds and the faith required to immigrate, which would definitely influence the perception of immigration right now in the United States. Hopefully with empathy and awareness Americans can become less polarized on this issue. I’m not an immigrant, but my mom had told me similar stories in the past about when she traveled from China to the United States to go to college when she was only 16. She didn’t have any money but found support through a PhD program at Boston University, which is a very compelling story.