No, my views on immigration did not change significantly after reading the book, watching the short film, and hearing the talk from Ms. Phillips. This is because I already had a pro-immigration view, and these discussions acted more of a confirmation to my current beliefs. That being said, these stories did help solidify why I believe that immigration is beneficial and should be open to all people. There are many countries in the world facing difficult or dangerous circumstances, and the people within those countries should be able to decide whether or not they want to flee those dangerous cases, or even just move for personal reasons. Especially for the teacher that was being persecuted in her native country because she was a teacher, it was reliving to hear that she was able to feel safe in the United States. The most surprising thing to me about the women in the book was the diversity in situations that caused them to immigrate. Some were moving because they felt unsafe in their native country, others to provide better opportunities for themselves and their children, and even one that moved because she was essentially forced into an unwanted marriage. Each situation for each of the women was very unique, and the fact that they were willing to give up all the great things they had back at home for a new life in a foreign country is difficult to imagine and very admirable. I am not an immigrant, which does admittedly make it difficult to relate and identify with any of the women. That being said, I do sympathize and relate to the Armenian women who immigrated to America after the collapse of the Soviet Union. As someone who follows history closely, I understand not only how brutal the Soviet regime was, but also the great amount of uncertainty that followed the collapse of the communist state. Although it is saddening that they had to leave their life behind in Armenia, leaving for the sake of personal safety is very understandable, and I am glad that we were able to find some peace in America. After reading the stories, I asked myself two questions. The first question is ”what are the circum- stances that would motivate a person to move countries?”. It seems that the answer to this is full of diverse, unique scenarios. That being said, it seems that safety and opportunity are the two largest motivating factors for moving countries. If a native country does not offer the safety a family needs, or lacks any prospects for upwards mobility economically for their children, the person will be motivated to move to a country that is safer with these better opportunities. The second question is ”how difficult is it to immigrate to the United States?”. The answer to this can be summed up with ”very difficult”. The immigration process itself, moving from a native country to a new one, is already incredibly hard. The immigrants have to learn a new language, pick up new jobs (that are usually worse than the ones they had in their native countries), assimilate into a new culture, and much more. Many of the women in the book expressed difficulties with adapting to their new lives, with some of the women being unable to learn English due to their age, and lamenting the loss of their previous jobs. However, on top of all these person adjustments, there is the visa process to immigrate into the United States. This process is extremely tough and time consuming to deal with in its own right, and can complicate the process of moving to the United States even further. The answer to this question makes it apparent that the visa process needs to be made easier so that immigrants can focus more time on adjusting to their new life in America. I am not an immigrant, nor do I have a family member alive that is. The only message I can contribute to this question is what I learned from my grandma who spent many years living in South America as a part of an American military family. From her I learned many of the similar lessons that I see in the immigrant women from the stories: how to deal with a new language, and how to assimilate to a new culture. From this experience living abroad, my grandmother returned to the United States both fluent in Spanish and very disciplined. She instilled this discipline onto my mother and her sisters. From what I can tell as a third party observer, although immigration is incredibly difficult for the immigrant, the experience itself can help build one up to be a much stronger, more adaptable person.