The book didn’t really change my perspective, but rather confirmed it, and reminded me of the extent of difficulties for immigrants. Although it’s common for immigrants to experience tons of hardships, as an immigrant to the US at the young age of 9, it wasn’t that hard for me to assimilate. After reading the stories in the book, I’m reminded that immigration isn’t as glorious as my personal experience. I’ve been fortunate enough to have a roof over my head and no financial worries as an undergraduate college student. Sometimes, I think I'm so wrapped up in my own bubble that I forget that many immigrants struggle profusely. I was surprised that many women were victims of warfare or periods of great unrest and discrimination. For instance, although Nara lived during Soviet Union’s rule in Russia, as an Armenian, the genocide prompted many Armenians to leave the country for promise of something better. Perhaps of the bubble my parents wrapped me under from a young age, but I was never exposed to an immense amount of suffering or really difficult lives. Reading about such stories made me empathize with my fellow immigrants even more. It’s not just the language difference; the most difficult things are relevant to their personal lives. I’m also surprised how much moving to a new country affected their personal lives - since I was fortunate enough to not have such pernicious effects upon moving to the US. Disappointment is momentary, but loneliness could last a lifetime, as we’ve seen in many of these stories. Even when they’ve built lives for themselves, women like Xidan never felt completely comfortable with her job. Throughout her entire life, she had an ambitious mindset; she wanted to push herself to the limits to achieve great things, and make herself proud as a result. Especially during the interview, like Susan Phillips mentioned in our class discussion, it’s clear to me by the tones of these women when discussing various parts of their lives, that they never forgot the glory and pride they felt in their native countries. It’s sad to think about, that such amazing lives did not live up to their fullest potentials, much of the time due to cultural ideals like marrying a husband to appease the family expectation. I identify with Nara and Xidan a lot, due to their native culture’s sense of “community.” As an immigrant from China with my parents growing up in China, I’ve been indoctrinated with lots of Chinese cultural ideals surrounding the concept of community. Xidan states in her story that “country comes first” in many communist countries, a similar ideal that Nara grew up under in SU. Growing up in America upon immigrating here in 2nd grade, I felt from a young age the clash of ideals in my home country’s community and American independence. Additionally, I often try to please my parents in a lot of ways like how Xidan did by marrying her first husband. In my own life, I try to please my parents by getting good grades, dressing “like a girl,” and attending as many extended family events as possible, even if it means flying back to the country, as this is appropriate in Chinese culture, in emphasis of the concept of community over our own livelihoods and independence. I ask myself why I’m still unhappy a lot of times, even though I grew up adapting to the US with a much easier time than women discussed in the book, partly due to my younger age, resulting in a more adaptable mind. I guess I don’t really have an answer to this question, other than a possibility that people just tend to never be completely fulfilled. After reading stories like this, I remind myself to be grateful for what has been given to me by pure luck, and to take advantage of opportunities individuals like the women in the stories never got to experience. Although it was relatively easy for me to assimilate to the culture compared to many individuals, I still had hardships; perhaps it was just so long ago that I’ve forgotten any form of unpleasant memories. In short, I worked tediously to memorize vocabulary, putting myself out there at such a young age trying to learn the culture. More than trying to become popular, for a year or so, I was merely trying to learn to communicate with everyone my age, learning considerably basic things such as how to ride the swing, since elementary schools in China only had a track field like most American high schools. I think more than anything, I learned how to persist and believe in myself at a young age. The hard working mindset from my Chinese culture came to great use; I was told by my parents that working hard would lead to great results.