to Ms. Phillip’s Book: China After reading Philips’ chapter about Xidan, I was very shocked to learn about the history of China and the cultural revolution through a woman’s perspective. Compared to the US, where I grew up, I found many differences between the culture and traditions, and importantly how women were treated. Xidan’s story was very inspiring to hear because of the hardships she went through. I really enjoyed hearing about her background and her story of success. I am very impressed that Xidan became a doctor, trained as a plastic surgeon, and also built a very successful beauty spa in China, despite the disadvantages and hardships she went through as a child and young woman. Reading about her experiences made me question the differences between the US and China, specifically the treatment of women. I was shocked to hear that women in China had to follow so many rules, and were expected to follow traditions, such as staying home to take of their child, being a housewife, or even not speaking up for themselves when needed, therefore I was really touched to read that Xidan rejected all these traditions and was motivated and eager to fight for her beliefs and for what she wants. Additionally, I thought it was amazing how China is becoming more united, unlike times in the cultural revolution under Mao Zhedong’s leadership. Although China has been closed to the rest of the world, China is now considered one of the most powerful countries and they are proud of their ability to finally be able to live in peace and respect. The chapter I read was about Nara and Oktiabrina and their experiences as Armenian refugees. One thing I found incredibly intriguing was how Nara said that communist families had “red baptisms” where they would give their children names such as Proletariat or Vladimir to show their dedication to the Bolshevik Revolution. Oktiabrina’s name means October, the month the revolution started. Despite the dedication of her family to the Communist Party, her grandfather was thrown into prison for being an accused Trotskyite and denounced the party after his release from incarceration. I found this to be a really interesting point throughout the reading because it shows how people are often enticed into blind devotion to a certain political party or ideology that does not exist to benefit them. This devotion can be seen today with President Trump as his supporters demonstrate a strong passion and loyalty to a leader that does not follow through on his promises for their betterment. Another thing I found shocking was the fact that the Armenian Genocide is constantly ignored and blatantly unaccepted by the government of Turkey, even after one and one-half million Armenians were killed. I personally did not know anything about the Armenian Genocide, or the injustices Armenians faced. I think the American education system selectively chooses which major historical events students are going to be taught and this leaves us with a very Westernized viewpoint that shows us the United States through rose- colored glasses, similar to what Nara said about her experiences in the Soviet Union. While the conditions in the United States are not nearly as extreme as those in the Soviet Union where Nara grew up, I think it is important to recognize similarities in our experiences as a way of reflection.