I believe my views on immigration became stronger and I have even more support for people who try to immigrate to America. I believe immigrants are the backbone of America who drive the economy more than we think. After talking with Ms. Philips, America is truly just a melting pot of all cultures and identities. At least in California, most of the people around us on a daily basis come from some sort of ethnic background and we’re truly all descendants from immigrants. In these times where immigration is so controversial, I think it's important to have an open mind and think of the perspective of immigrants coming to the United States. Most immigrants are seeking asylum, leaving a country of war, and finally coming to a land of endless opportunities, much for the same reason why my parents immigrated to America. What surprised me about the women in the book is how resilient and determined these women were to pushing themselves for a better future. One of the quotes that stood out to me was from Juanita, in which she said something along the lines of “I had to work to survive, even though it was work that I didn’t want to do.” After hearing this quote, we had a discussion regarding the sense of pride that these women had before giving up their life and coming over to America. I can not imagine how hard it would be to come from a distinguished job, such as an engineer, doctor, teacher, in your country, and immigrating to a new country where you do not know the language and can only get a “basic” level job, like a janitor or factory worker. These women sacrificed their pride, livelihood, and themselves to come to another country with barely anything with just the hope of providing a better future for their family, which is something that I admire. The woman that I identified most with was Thunyga. Thuynga's story of living in Vietnam and escaping during a time of civil war, reminded me of my parents ' and grandparents' time in Iran when the Shah of Iran was overthrown. During this time, there was an ongoing civil war in Iran and it started the formation of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, which ended much of the democracy in Iran and many of the basic rights for women. Women were unable to go outside without covering their bodies and had to wear hijabs to cover their hair, essentially limiting their individual freedom, which is still present today. Thunyga constantly trying to escape from Vietnam and being captured, captured the resistance and persistence that my father and mother had to endure to escape from Iran to come to America. My father especially had to essentially say his final goodbyes to his village and family in Iran, as he has not been able to visit them for 35 years. As an Iranian-American, I ask myself how do I feel coming from an immigrant family? How do I balance between my Persian heritage with my American identity? Am I truly Persian? Most of the questions I do not have an answer for, however I strive to push myself to answer these questions. I think with time and as I become older, and hopefully have an established career and family I can truly answer these questions. However, one action that I will do to answer these questions is start asking my family about their history and hopefully learn new stories that I didn’t know before! I am not an immigrant, but I’ve learned that I should have more conversations with my family regarding my culture. I want to ask more questions and learn about the history of family, and eventually pass it down to my future kids. I want to create a legacy and continue my Persian heritage and educate others regarding the traditional Persian practices, such as Eid/char shab e suri. I would like to further educate myself in my culture again, by learning how to read/write, and improve on my farsi skills.