Yes, my views on immigration changed after reading the stories in the book, watching the short film about the book, talk by Ms. Philps and discussion with her because I initially thought that the immigration life would be smoothly and eventually get assimilated into US society like becoming fluent in English, having small talks even with strangers and etc. in the subsequent years as an immigrant, however, my views of such fantasy and hope were nothing but possibilities, since while some do get to a path of comfortably assimilating into US society, others still struggle to this day. Instead, my views on immigration have shifted back to the idea of survival of the fittest and finding that common ground, where while it is possible for some people to become fluent in English, get comfortable with having small talks with strangers, and etc, others would either try and find a common ground in a foreign country, United States, like a community that speaks a language that they feel comfortable speaking, or a few, in rare scenarios, might find it very challenging to comfortably live in the US as an immigrant to the point where they might return back to their country of origin. Their resilience and devotion for the future of their children were what surprised me about the women in the book, where they were eager to sacrifice things that they valued and cherished in their country of origin for the sake of a better life (so called American dream) for their family like for either their parents or children. I identified with the women from China, Xidan Wang because similar to her, when I told my parents that I didn’t want to immigrate to the US, they complained me using the unstable political and economic situation in Myanmar, where in the end, I had to give in and immigrate alongside my parents and brothers. Also, similar to her, after being here in the US as an immigrant for a few years, I honestly don’t know if there are any best things that I found in the US since I miss my country a lot from being able to commute to my friends, restaurants, monasteries, after school tuition centers, and internet cafes with just walking to being assigned to straightforward but challenging tasks at schools, tuitions, and house chores. Although I understand that being free is a privilege to promote creativity, I find this far more challenging than I had initially thought. After reading the stories, the questions I asked myself were : - How can I find the right balance between my past culture (Burmese culture) and US culture?” I try to have some kind of system where while I have US culture like speaking English and having small talks with anyone like my professors, classmates, and strangers, outside of home, I would have a Burmese culture when I’m at home like having a chat with my family and relatives in Burmese language and eating Burmese foods. - How did learning to speak and write English change the way I would express myself? After learning to speak and write English, I changed how I would express myself from being a very quiet person, to partially quiet but also wanting to help others, where I became an Embedded English tutor at Ohlone College before transferring to UCLA for the sake of helping others also learn to speak and write English comfortably, and I’m glad that I also got to help Burmese students speak and write English comfortably. - Have I found a community where I feel comfortable as if I was back in Myanmar? Yes, I have found a few Burmese communities throughout LA and the Bay Area, where I feel comfortable as if I was back in Myanmar. Yes, I do have answers to these questions, where I answered below the questions. Since I’m an immigrant and I feel comfortable with sharing some of my experiences, As a result of the women stories on immigration, I learned to find ways to make myself still feel comfortable in the US like keeping in touch and visiting a monastery, where Burmese culture thrives like getting to speak Burmese, eating traditional Burmese foods like tea leaves salad, a couple times every year, having some sense of Burmese culture at my family house and gatherings, forming groups chats with other Burmese students who are in the US as immigrants, international student visa, working visa or etc. All these three things are what I’ve experienced as an immigrant to keep myself comfortable, and I learned that there are some things that had to change as a result of them, where I still had to speak English when I hangout with other Burmese students since some of them want to get used to speaking English.