My views on immigration did not change after reading the stories in the book, watching the short film about the book, or the talk by Ms. Philips and discussion with her. As a daughter of immigrants, I believe that immigration is necessary and should be allowed. Something that surprised me about the women in their book was their courage to share their deeply personal stories despite the painful memories or limited English. It was interesting to see how despite all coming from different backgrounds and places, they shared similar stories and struggles, and yet maintained a strong sense of hope and purpose. Whether it be China, Armenia, or Mexico, all of these women display strength and courage, along with a desire to belong, provide for their families, and to be understood. I identified with all of the women but mostly with Thuynga Nguyen because we both are Vietnamese and she reminded me of my mom a lot. My mom also was educated in Vietnam but upon coming to the United States, she was unable to use her skills due to her limited English and opportunities for immigrants. Thuynga was originally a computer programmer but had to switch careers in the US, similarly to my mom. I am not sure why but many people seem to think that immigrants are not smart because they are unable to speak English, even though that is not true. People are smart and articulate in their native language and the fact that they are able to communicate in that language and English is a demonstration of how smart they are and just because they may not know English does not mean they are incompetent. I also greatly identify with the woman from Mexico who spoke of how in the US, there weren’t as many celebrations and there was a different culture. In Vietnam, community is a big part of the people’s lives and it is common to have stores and then homes built on top of those stores and people will often sit in front of their stores and talk to neighbors and get along with people who walk by compared to in the US, in which families are very nuclear and it is much more difficult to get to know people or know what is going on in the lives of others. Growing up in Orange County, the home to Little Saigon, I identify with the feeling of “in between two worlds” as there are many Vietnamese and American people here and I relate to that feeling of navigating between different identities and expectations while trying to find my place. Questions that I asked myself include what does it mean to “belong”. Is it something others give you through acceptance or something that you claim for yourself by embracing your identity? I don’t think there is a simple answer, but I do believe belonging starts from within, from valuing your own story before expecting others to. I also asked myself what does it mean to be American and what privileges do I take for granted. I always thought to be American, it meant to be free and independent and I remember hearing the “home of the brave” and “land of the free” every day in class during the pledge of allegiance and I find it strange that many people also think America is supposed to be that and yet there is so much discourse over freedom and immigration in current times. I also have recognized that I have lots of privileges and there are times when I don’t want to do homework or go to work and yet I fail to realize how many people would love to be more educated and learn and be able to go to a job where they are able to sit down in an AC room and not do manual labor. I am not an immigrant but my parents are immigrants from Vietnam and it reminds me of the hardships that immigrants face and the resilience and strength they display. Sometimes, I look at my parents and I forget how much they have given up in order to provide a better life for me. Sometimes I take the life that I have right now for granted when there are so many other people throughout the world who dream of the opportunities that I have. In American culture, individualism and independence are core values and it is common to forget about others and their needs and there are times when I am ashamed of my country for not caring about others. I have seen my mom, for example, struggle to get jobs because of her limited English and people discriminating against her for it. Similarly, as a Vietnamese American, people have also discriminated against me for being Vietnamese. I was placed in English learners despite having adequate English and having the highest score in class. I remember my mom packing lunch for me and students around me questioning what I was eating; one day, I had brought squid and rice to lunch and all the kids around me kept laughing about how I was eating octopus and how it was scary. At the time I felt ashamed of my food and would rather starve but I’ve learned that food is a part of my culture and identity and I will not be ashamed of it anymore. I am proud to be both Vietnamese and American. America is supposed to be a melting pot with a diverse and big community of people and that is something that I think people have forgotten recently.