While I will say my overall views of immigration did not change, I think that I understand much more about what motivated people to immigrate to America and what struggles they face along the way. Many of their stories are filled with emotion — both positive and negative — and I learned things I never experienced personally in my life. I read Xidan’s story in the book, and hearing how she struggled with work and marriage really illustrated to me the unique kinds of cultural struggles immigrants face. Immigrants are stuck between two worlds: the culture they grew up in, one where they often feel lacks the freedom they want, but where they still have an identity and purpose, AND the culture they immigrated to, where they feel much more freedom, but where they now struggle with both judgment and barriers within and from others. In the video, many immigrants did not share struggles in detail of racism or discrimination by Americans, but I wonder how that may have changed today. What surprised me was that many of these women had noble, prestigious jobs in their native countries, but came to the United States and often are not working to their full potential with their skill sets. Much of it is because the U.S. does not recognize foreign certifications or education for professional positions. I wonder if this can and should change. Allowing immigrants to work the jobs they already know how to do, even if they are not “skilled” from an American POV, can give them opportunities and purpose. I would say I probably identify with Xidan the most, mostly because I can see the struggle of balancing both an American and Chinese cultural background. While I am not an immigrant, I too have felt a disconnect from how I was raised versus how “Americans” raise their children. So while I don’t necessarily relate with a language barrier or differences in family dynamics, I do relate to Xidan’s disconnect in values between Chinese and American cultures (where one is more collectivist and the other is more individualistic). I also agree with what she said about how these lines are blurring today; as China has developed, its economy and people have often become more individualistic and capitalistic, similar to the United States. More broadly though, I feel that sometimes what feels “right” or “wrong” (or perhaps “expected” or “unexpected” of me) can be unclear. In some ways, I feel both cultures have “good” and “bad” elements. I believe and hope we can have a country where everyone feels welcome and where people are treated with respect, dignity, and forgiveness; where people seek to help each other, regardless of our differences. At the same time, I respect the values of freedom and individualism; I believe strength comes from a willingness to discuss our problems freely, to not seek the easy way out and avoid conflict, but come up with better solutions and be honest and blunt about these challenges. I think the United States, as a country of immigrants, uniquely faces many of these challenges — whether it’s directly in terms of immigration policy, or more broadly as an issue of trust in government which has been exacerbated recently. Xidan’s concerns at the end of how it seems that both China and the United States are becoming more individualistic at the cost of shared societal benefit are valid. At the same time, I think what I appreciate about the United States is how we are free to discuss these issues, and how we, though often too slowly and with many setbacks, are moving in a direction of freedom, justice, and opportunity by building coalitions across demographic boundaries. What can I do to make immigrants (and indeed all people) feel more welcome? How can we increase opportunity and use their unique voices, which likely resonate with many more people than we would initially think, to build an American culture that blends the best of everyone and every culture? While I have initial thoughts, I definitely don’t have the complete answers to these questions. What we have recently seen in the U.S. is a political culture based on resentment; where people, often immigrants, are scapegoated as why another group of people is struggling economically or socially. But I think underscoring all of these challenges is an issue of belonging — whether or not someone economically, socially, or politically belongs. You can’t feel like you belong if you can’t find a job in your industry that matches your skills, or if you experience racism or discrimination. When these issues become more severe, I believe many of us naturally gravitate to more radical, more “exclusive” solutions that pit us against each other. I feel solving this challenge will require both a data-driven and humanistic approach. We need to be creating and passing policies that create abundance for all people and that are actually effective and can prove that an inclusive democracy based on values of justice, equity, and diversity can actually deliver. At the same time, people are not numbers. We need to meet people where they are, and speak to their core needs, values, and wants. I think that’s why reading stories like these are important. Yes, they are anecdotes, and maybe they aren’t representative of every immigrant’s experience. However, this is a valuable starting point to see where people’s sense of belonging and trust in institutions breaks down, and identify where we can improve. I am not an immigrant, but my parents are immigrants. As I stated in class, I often felt stuck between two worlds growing up that often had different “needs” from me. I felt like I often had to choose one and abandon another based on what would be socially acceptable or what I felt was right (which, looking back, may not have always been right). I feel grateful and thankful to have grown up in such a diverse country full of opportunities and incredible people who helped shape my core values. At the same time, I think growing up in the U.S. has exposed me to the strains and weaknesses we as humans have when living in such a diverse country. If I had grown up in China, I may not have experienced as much racism and discrimination as I did growing up in America. But, I think recognizing these often shared but unique struggles has motivated me to (somewhat) understand how we can build long-term, data-driven solutions that actually address these core issues and allow everyone to feel like they belong in this country. This is one of the reasons I am studying both political science and statistics/data science. There are many who view politics and statistics as opposing elements. I do feel though we are in a political environment where modern-day “populism” refers to policies that feel good but sometimes divide people and leave them worse off — whereas a more objective politics is seen as less sincere, more contrived, and at its worst, used as an excuse to maintain the status quo. I hope that we can one day recognize how to build the kinds of institutions that are able to integrate the objective and subjective, the data-driven and humanistic, to meet the disparate needs of a diverse population.