My views on immigration did not quite change from one end to another after reading the stories in the book; rather, I think that they have been echoed. During high school, I had an assignment where I had to interview my grandparents about their experiences immigrating to America. And, I think that was the first time where I really reflected on what it meant to be a U.S. immigrant. But, when I read the women’s stories, it was interesting to read about how the things that they struggled with were the same things that my parents struggled with. For instance, I thought that the part about how one of the women wanted to get her own life outside of the domestic sphere by driving herself to school to learn English and gain a sense of her own agency back reminded me of my mom’s experience when she fought so hard against my dad to get her own job and expand her life outside of the domestic household. I think because of that it was nice to hear that the things that my family struggles with (i.e. this example of immigrating to America while also balancing gender norms) were something that was more widespread than I initially believed. I was surprised about how much willpower the women in the book had. When I think back to my own life, my biggest challenge was moving from Northern California to Southern California. That, in itself, was already very scary for me because I could not be easily accessible to my family and go home as I pleased. However, when I think of these women’s lives who had to go across oceans on their own, I become appalled. I am not sure I would have the same willpower to be able to want to keep striving forward. The woman I related with the most was Xidan Wang. The reason that I identified with her the most is because we grew up with the same cultural background so it was easy to relate to her experiences because all of the things that she remarked about regarding cultural expectations were things I faced. I also found that I related to her because she is so fiercely independent, which is something that I also find within myself. One of the questions that I asked myself is what would I tell myself to be able to keep going? Would I be able to muster the courage to carry on? Or, would I just blame the cards that I was given and refuse to take ownership over the future of my own life? Essentially, I would question what type of person I would become in the face of this conflict: a fighter or a coward. I don’t think I have any answers to my questions because I, obviously, would like to say that I could become a fighter and keep going. However, I truly do not know if I have the heart to stomach all that burden, and I will not know until I am in the face of this situation myself. I am not an immigrant, but my parents and grandparents are. Despite not being an immigrant, I can share my experiences of what it is like to grow up in two households. I grew up in the Bay Area, which entailed that a large majority of the people that I was surrounded by looked like me. So, I didn’t really feel the sense of cultural shame that others might have felt if they were one of the few, if not only, Asians at their school. However, because of that, I failed to recognize how prevalent Asian discrimination was in the U.S. until the 2020 pandemic hit and Asian hate crimes were on the rise. Another thing that I realized was that when I learned about U.S. history, I never really felt like the stories catered to me. In fact, it wasn’t until I was in AP U.S. history that I finally heard Chinese people being represented in U.S. history through the Chinese Exclusion Act. And, although disheartening, it was also enlightening to me because it finally felt like I could start to learn about the place that Asian Americans hold in U.S. history. And from that point onward, I have started to do more research into the Asian American experience and what it entails. And, after doing an early search and discovery into this, it’s interesting to read about how the sentiment of things that I have felt throughout my life have been echoed with others. Primarily, I think the struggle between the Asian norm of every elder being deserving your respect whereas the American norm of having to earn someone’s respect was something that I felt heard when I read about this experience through others encounters. I have learned that I can, and should, be able to take agency over my won cultural identity.