Yes, after reading some chapters of the book, watching the short films, and discussing with Ms. Philips I grew a deeper appreciation for immigrants, especially women immigrants. Before these talks I wouldn’t really think or consider the extra hardships that women immigrants faced. This includes giving up on their careers, learning a new language, and adjusting to a completely different culture. It reinforced my appreciation for what it means to be an immigrant of the United States. I was surprised most by the fact that a lot of these women gave up promising careers when they came to the United States. Before I believed that when people immigrated to the United States they would be able to create their own careers as it is known for opportunity. I didn’t realize that if a doctor immigrated from China they wouldn’t be able to practice medicine in the United States or have the resources to become a certified doctor. This further grew my appreciation for immigrants. I most identified with Xidan Wang. She is originally from China where she was a doctor then immigrated to the United States after a forced marriage and had to give up her career. I identify with her because I am working extremely hard to create a career for myself and would be devastated if it was taken away from me. Even though I said I most closely identify with her, I could only imagine giving up everything to come to another country. While hearing the stories I asked myself how they related to my mom and her transition from France to the United States. My mom met my dad at University and they married soon after. They moved between France and the US for a while as my dad worked for a French American company. My mom even had my sister in France where then she had to give up her job. We settled in the US when I was 5 and have been in the South Carolina sense. Although her story is unique from the stories in the book I wonder which story she relates to the most. I am going to give her the book and ask her this. I am not an immigrant.