I chose to read Chapter 2 on China and I thought the reading had many interesting topics, one being the drastic changes the country and people of China went through during the mid-to-late 20th century. The part that fascinated me the most was the Cultural Revolution, and how families were brainwashed into purging their friends, family, and even themselves for the greater good of the Communist party because of their socioeconomic status, beliefs, or wrongdoings. I also thought it was interesting how fast Chinese society recovered post-cultural revolution; while traditional culture and traditions remained, they were able to pursue education, start businesses, and adopt Western practices of beauty and society (all things that would have categorized them under the Five Black Categories of the cultural revolution). It’s also important to note the challenges women face(d) in an evolving society such as China; they are still expected to conform to social norms and be the inferior relative to a man, yet they are still expected to succeed and “have face”. Xidan shamed her parents, worked in the countryside, went to college and became a doctor, started her own beauty business, went through a hard marriage, and moved to the United States. It’s amazing how one woman can push through so much struggle and hardship to overcome gender norms and societal barriers to her becoming a scholar and doctor. Even in the US, Xidan didn’t know the language, the customs, or what to expect and she has still made a life for herself. Lastly, it’s inspiring to see how far the Chinese people have come from just 50 years ago; China’s history still haunts members of society but they are now one of the most economically productive, rapidly growing countries in the world exporting talent in education, sports, technology, etc. across the globe. While this success story is not representative of all Chinese people who experienced the Cultural Revolution and the CCP’s current reign, it does show how your background, experiences, and knowledge can contribute to society, and how far you can come to achieve your goals and aspirations.