I read the chapter about Xidan Wang, chapter 2 of Ms. Philip’s book. This story was very interesting since it was kind of related to my family background. The experiences that Xidan had are nowhere near what my mother experienced but were similar since she had immigrated to America from China. My mother was pressured to marry at a young age and came from a background of farming in a rural area in Guangdong, China. Contrary to what Xidan had experienced, my mother did not receive much education. The highest level of education that she completed was middle school. Coming to America, she was not able to communicate well with others since she could not speak English. Even now, her English is still not very good. Reading Xidan’s story gave insight to the many traditions of Chinese culture that I had known for a long time but have never known of people who had experienced them. Being Chinese, I’ve learned that the traditions and expectations that were carried on in the past have evolved now, and we as the newer generation are not required to meet the expectations that were set from the older generation. Xidan’s story had followed many of the older traditions that were set, passed down for generations. Now, especially those who are American born Chinese are only held to a couple of those standards such as, getting married, doing well in school, and having children. Xidan’s story reminded me much of the experiences of my mother. She had given everything up in China and moved to America, to give me and my siblings a better chance at life. I had the opportunity to read the chapter from Ms. Susan Philips’ book discussing Xidan’s journey to becoming a doctor in China, her experiences with marriage, and her eventual move to the United States. Reading her story was eye opening in that I was able to learn about her first- hand experience growing up in Communist China and her journey to America. It was interesting to hear her reflect on the differences between Chinese and American culture. My family is also from China and my parents also grew up during the Cultural Revolution, much like Xidan. Although I knew about some of the Chinese traditions she described, some were new to me. Xidan’s experience with Chinese culture is a much more traditional one than mine. But, there were many elements of Xidan’s childhood that sounded similar to my parents’ stories of their experiences growing up during the Cultural Revolution. When Xidan mentioned that coming to America from China without knowing English is like “living in a prison” (pg. 53), I was reminded of my mother’s experience. My mother had echoed the same sentiment and felt quite isolated when first coming to America, as she did not know English.