After reading a chapter from Ms. Philps’ book, my perspective on immigration underwent a significant shift, particularly in terms of the immigrant experience as both an adult and a child. When reading the story of the woman from China, I realized the difficulty of immigrating to a new country as an adult. In the story of Xidan Wange, when she arrives in the United States, she struggles a lot as she is completely unfamiliar with the language. Therefore, although she was a prosperous businesswoman and doctor in China, she lost her sense of identity. Upon reading this, I realized the difference when immigrating as a child because I also immigrated to Korea when I was in elementary school. Because my experience was smoother as it was easier to learn the language as as a kid, I realized the colossal struggle of immigrating as an adult. One thing that surprises me about the women in the book is their perseverance. In the story of Xidan, she overcame her childhood and that she underwent until she immigrated to the United States. As a kid, with her family coming from an affluent background, she experienced great adversity during the Cultural Revolution. Moreover, she spent years as a barefoot doctor in the rural areas of China and still managed to make it to Medical School. Despite her great adversity, Xidan was able to make a name for herself and open a clinic that was widely recognized. I was astonished by the level of her grit and strength to persevere. I identified with Xidan because, as an Asian American myself, I understood the struggles of some of my family members who immigrated as adults. As a child of an immigrant family, I have relatives who had a difficult time assimilating into American culture, like Xidan. As adult immigrants already had an entire life in their home country, it is often extremely difficult to adapt to a completely new culture. With Asian and Western culture being drastically different in terms of social norms, it makes it that much more difficult, and I really connected with Xidan’s story. One question I asked myself after reading the stories was, “Do I have it too easy?” With Xidan having an extremely tough childhood and adolescence, I began to question myself and think whether my childhood was too smooth and how that would make me different from her. After thinking for a while, I concluded how grateful I should be for my parents and their struggles. As my parents chose to immigrate to America to give me an environment where I can prosper at the cost of their struggles, I realized the immense love that my parents have for me and how I can repay their sacrifice when I grow older. My immigrant story is a little different from others. Although I was born in America, I immigrated to South Korea when I was in 4th grade and returned to the States in 8th grade. This 4-year period of immigration to South Korea granted me the opportunity to familiarize myself with two entirely different cultures. Upon arriving in Korea, there were social norms that I quickly picked up on, such as dining etiquette, not talking to strangers, and differences in dealing with elders. After learning how the same tasks are completed differently in the two countries, I realized that there is not one group that is doing a task wrong. Instead, they are raised in different cultures, and I learned the importance of respecting where one comes from and trying to understand them instead of confronting them.