Ana's and Juanita's Stories
Ana Leiva was born on December 15, 1944, in the city of Santa Ana, El Salvador, which is in the northwest part of the country. After graduating from Escuela Normal (teaching college) in 1965, she began her career as an elementary school teacher, which she continued for thirteen years.
Then, on March 19, 1981, at the beginning of the Civil War, Ana and her two children, Juanita, eleven, and Eduardo, three, fled their country, which had become so dangerous that every day they feared for their lives. Her husband Miguel joined her fifteen days later.
Here are Ana's and Juanita's stories.
________________


Historical Note
The Civil War in El Salvador, which lasted from 1980 to 1992, had its roots in the economic and social inequalities that defined the country for much of the nineteenth century. During that time, fourteen families owned 99 percent of the wealth in the country, their interests protected by a series of military governments that maintained the status quo through a campaign of intimidation and repression.
There were many challenges to this power, but most were met with overwhelming force. In 1969, El Salvador went to war with Honduras in what is called "The Football War." The war, which left the Salvadoran economy devastated, helped create the conditions for the rise of opposition parties and guerrilla armies, resulting in the twelve-year El Salvador Civil War.
________________


Ana Begins Her Story
My Parents
My father, Ricardo Aguirre, was born in Santa Ana, El Salvador, in 1914. He was the oldest of five children. He loved reading and learning and probably could have become a teacher or lawyer if he had continued in school, but he only went for six years, which was the basic education at that time. After sixth grade, most children either learned a trade or found a job. My father went to work for the city newspaper, Diario de Occidente, as a typesetter.
In the early 1940s, when my father was about twenty-eight, he and his brother Frank went to Panama for a few years to work on the Panama Canal. As the oldest child, my father had to step up and take care of the family because his father had left them behind to live with another woman. After my father and his brother came back from Panama, my uncle Frank moved to New York, where he opened a photo studio and started sending money to my grandmother, which she used to open a small community store. She sold everything—soap, spices, bread, and candies. She added a soda shop where she sold juices and paletas (ices). She had a large neighborhood clientele.
My mother, Salvadora Morán de Santillana, was born in the Department of Santa Ana, outside of the city, in a little town called Chalchuapa near Tazumal, the Mayan ruins. She had three sisters and one brother. My mother only went to school for one year because her mother thought that if she could read and write, she would send love letters to boys. She always regretted not going further in school.
My mother's family owned a small plot of land outside the city where they planted crops like tobacco and different fruits and vegetables. One of their neighbors wanted to buy their land, but my grandmother didn't want to sell. To scare her into selling the land, the neighbor chopped off her braids with a machete. He intended to chop off her head but only got the braids. After that, my grandmother sold their land.
My mother's parents split up when she was ten years old, and she and one of her sisters went to live with their father. A year later, he died, and my grandmother took my mother to San Salvador, the capital, to live with another family as hija de crianza, which was like legal slavery. This was a common practice at that time. Because of poverty, people wanted to have fewer mouths to feed and children to clothe. These girls had no rights, and many were sexually abused by men who lived in the houses. When my mother was thirteen, the nephew of the owner of the house attempted to rape her. She was saved when a friend came to the door and yelled my mother's name.
My mother had only lived at the house a few months when my grandmother died, leaving my mom an orphan. She eventually went to live with her sister in Santa Ana, but that was difficult. My mother and her sister were like oil and water. My mother was easygoing and always got along with everyone, but her sister was impulsive with an explosive temper.
Most women in our culture are dominated by "machismo," which is when men think they can run everything.
When my mother was eighteen, she met my father, Ricardo. My father's family didn't like my mother because, as an orphan, she couldn't bring a dowry to the marriage. This practice comes from colonial times when women "came to the table" with more than themselves, but since my mother was an orphan, she only came with herself. My parents never married, but they were together for eight years and had two children.
My mom lived with my sister Margarita and me at her house, and my father lived at his mom's house and would come after work to see us and then go back to his mother's. Like a lot of men of his time, he was a mama's boy who didn't want to take on too much responsibility.
My mother was always independent and far ahead of her time. For one thing, she smoked, and women just didn't do that in my country at that time. She also liked to work and make her own money, and she never wanted to rely on a husband to support her. My mom taught me how to fight and get ahead in difficult times. Maybe because she was orphaned at such an early age, she wanted to make sure I could take care of myself.
Salvadoran mothers typically teach their daughters to be submissive and to serve their husbands. Even if the marriage is not working, they can never get a divorce. They have to suffer. My mom was different.
________________


My Mother’s Work and Influence
My mother was a very good businesswoman. I remember going with her to the train station to buy fresh fruits, vegetables, eggs, and chicken to sell house-to-house. She also made chilate, which is a cultural drink—our version of a high tea. It’s made of roasted corn and spices like anise, sassafrás, allspice, and ginger, and you drink it with sweet foods to balance the sweetness. She would set up chairs and tables around a pit where the chilate would cook.
On Sundays, my mother would go to the outskirts of Santa Ana to sell soap, which at that time was made out of lard and ash. She always worked and never rested.
When I was eight years old, my parents split up. My father told my mother that she could keep me because I was the older of the two daughters, but he wouldn't leave her alone until she gave him my little sister Margarita. Growing up, I always wanted to be near my little sister, and every time I visited her at my father's house, I cried. My grandmother would scold me and tell me not to come if I was going to cry. I never felt comfortable at my father's house, but he always tried to make sure my sister and I saw each other.
My sister and I are completely different. She is outgoing like our mother, always needing to be the center of attention. I was more like my father, who loved reading and talking with people. I would read anything I could get my hands on—comic books, magazines, and novels. I especially liked biographies, like those of Madame Curie and Florence Nightingale. I liked the fact that they were strong women and had been successful in their careers.
________________


My Stepfather and Siblings
When I was eight years old, my mother met Ricardo Santillana, who became my stepfather. My stepfather and I were never close, but as I got older, he became an important part of my life. He and my mother had a good relationship, and he also had a cordial relationship with my father, which was unusual.
My mom and stepfather had five children together, four boys and one girl. My half-sister was born when I was twenty. I was like a second mother to my half-siblings. In my culture, it is customary that the oldest child takes care of the younger children, so when my mom went to work, I was in charge. I felt it was my obligation to the family.
________________


Education and School Life
I loved school and got excellent grades, but I was often bored and when I finished my work, I would make trouble for the teachers. When I finished sixth grade, I took a test to be admitted to the Instituto Nacional de Santa Ana (INSA). There was a long list of names, beginning with the student with the highest score. First I looked at the middle of the list and then the end. I couldn’t find my name. Then suddenly, there it was at the top of the list. I had the highest score. The day I enrolled in INSA, all the teachers congratulated my mother. She was so proud.
Santa Ana was a beautiful and tranquil place. There were four churches in the center of the city, one for each direction—north, south, east, and west. Two had parks in front of them. Our main cathedral looked like Saint Patrick's Cathedral in New York City. People with money lived in barrios in the center of Santa Ana around the main plaza, the cathedral, and the park, and the poor people lived in barrios around the outskirts of the city. Each barrio had a different name: San Rafael, Santa Bárbara, San Lorenzo, Santa Lucía, Colón, Barrio Nuevo, and Santa Cruz. My barrio was San Rafael.
We lived in a mesón in San Rafael. Each family lived in one room with a small kitchen; the rooms were built around a square. The bathroom, sink, showers, and courtyard were in the middle of the square so everyone could share them. My mom, brothers, sisters, and I slept in the mesón. My stepfather worked at a mill near our house, and on most nights he would sleep there and come home to eat with the family.
Masa is used to make many things, such as tortillas, pasteles de carne, and tamales. The mill was an important part of everyday life. It was where people ground their food to eat or sell. I helped out at the mill whenever my stepfather needed me.
Even though he couldn’t read or write, he wanted to be kept up to date on news, so he would set aside bundles of newspapers for me to read to him whenever I went to the mill. He was great at math and could make calculations in his head. When my stepfather got together with my mom, he was working for someone else, but later he bought one mill and eventually owned several others. They were very methodical and hardworking, and when I was seventeen, they finally bought a little house.
________________


Political Awareness
My stepfather was very involved with one of the anti-government political parties in El Salvador, the PDC (Partido Demócrata Cristiano). Sometimes at midnight, he would leave the house to plaster anti-government posters on the walls, and when the Cuban revolution started, he would turn on the radio very low each night to listen to Fidel Castro's speeches. This was dangerous at that time. The government was always watching.
He got into trouble once around 1964 when he attended a teachers' meeting to plan a strike. The police came, rounded up people, and took them to jail, including my stepfather. We had to go and talk with a friend to get him out. At that time, if you were jailed for opposing the government, you were treated worse than a criminal.
________________


Meeting My Husband
I met my husband through one of his friends who was going out with my cousin. Pretty soon the four of us started to double-date. Every weekend we went to the movies, which were the only source of entertainment in the city, and on school days, he would always be waiting for me after my classes.
I liked him because he was humble, got along well with people, and said "yes" to everything I wanted. He also liked that I was smart and even helped me study for exams. Even though my husband only finished sixth grade, he never felt intimidated by me.
Life During the Civil War
When the Civil War started, life became very dangerous. Decapitated bodies were everywhere. Dead bodies were found in dumpsters, and shootouts could happen unexpectedly. Stray bullets killed innocent people.
Every week, when Juanita and I took the bus to the capital for her polio rehabilitation treatments, I would ride with fear that something could happen to us. The government set up checkpoints throughout the city. Many times they would stop the bus, force everyone off, and search handbags and backpacks for weapons. Sometimes they demanded money or the bus itself. If drivers refused, they would burn the bus. Many bus drivers were killed trying to protect their buses.
Unions began organizing one-day strikes in San Salvador. Many who marched were found burned beyond recognition the next day. One of my cousins was killed after going out past curfew; another step-cousin, German Santillana, disappeared completely in 1981 during the Civil War.
We never knew what would happen from day to day. Anyone could die, not because of their affiliations, but simply as a side effect of the war. Bombs could go off anywhere, and people lived with constant fear for their lives and their children’s futures.
Historical Context
The Civil War in El Salvador officially began on January 10, 1981, fought between the Salvadoran military dictatorship and the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Movement (FMLN), a unified opposition of five guerrilla groups formed on October 10, 1980.
Key events leading to the war included:
* The assassination of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero on March 24, 1980.

* The killing of forty-two mourners by government snipers at his funeral.

* The rape and murder of four American churchwomen on December 2, 1980.

The Civil War ended in January 1992 with the establishment of a new constitution, creating the FMLN as a legal political party, regulating the armed forces, and establishing a civilian police force. The war caused 75,000 civilian deaths and 8,000 disappearances, many by government-sponsored "death squads."
By summer 1981, life had become even more dangerous. Government death squads were killing teachers in their homes. At school, teachers had to be cautious. Groups like AMAD supported the government and could report teachers, leading to death.
In January 1981, guerrillas attacked the military headquarters, leading to several days of constant fighting. Streets were littered with decomposing bodies, and transportation was halted. Families hid in their homes, fearing for their loved ones.
We decided to leave the country due to the dire situation. My sister Margarita, living in New Jersey, helped us get visas, especially by providing a letter from a doctor stating Juanita needed medical care.
Juanita’s Story
I was a happy kid, focused on school and spending time with family. I always knew I had a disability due to polio, which required painful rehabilitation three times a week. My parents never let my disability define me.
One of my earliest memories of the Civil War was attending a meeting near City Hall with my mother and uncle at age five or six. Suddenly, the lights went out and shots were fired. My mother grabbed my hand tightly, and I felt a current of fear throughout the house.
Life was dangerous everywhere. Stray bullets, bombings, and disappearances were common. My parents feared for our future, and my brother and I often slept near our parents for protection.
When government searches, called cateos, came to neighborhoods, families hid “subversive” books. One time, Manuel and my grandmother burned the books under tortillas while pretending to cook. Even children learned the danger of speaking politically; trust was impossible.
On March 16, 1981, we left El Salvador. My husband stayed behind and joined us two weeks later. We brought only a few clothes and personal effects to avoid attention. Our journey to the U.S. was both terrifying and exciting.
In the U.S., we first lived in New Jersey with my sister. Winters were much colder than in El Salvador, and I struggled with the language and dependence on my husband since I couldn’t immediately work.
________________


Life in America
We lived in small quarters with family but tried to keep our Salvadoran culture alive: speaking Spanish at home, cooking traditional dishes, and maintaining customs for holidays. I worked in factories, first placing earrings on racks and later sewing army badges. The work was hard, cold, and monotonous, but it allowed me to provide for my family. Teaching in America was initially impossible, though it was the work I loved.
Juanita adapted quickly to U.S. schools. She learned English in three months and became academically confident. Despite the initial challenges of assimilation, she thrived in a supportive environment.
On July 5, 1987, our family moved to Los Angeles to be closer to extended family and for better weather. We faced challenges living with relatives, but over time, the move helped us integrate and grow as a family.
Life in America was full of discoveries—new foods, culture, and social norms—but we remained connected to our Salvadoran roots and traditions.
Reflection
The experience of leaving El Salvador and resettling in the U.S. strengthened us. Despite the hardships—fear, war, displacement, language barriers, and difficult jobs—we adapted, remained close as a family, and built new opportunities for our children.
When we first moved to Los Angeles, the four of us—my younger sister, my mother, my stepfather, and I—lived in a small house. It was wonderful living with my mom, and the climate was perfect.
Everything felt easier in Los Angeles. By this time, I had become accustomed to the country. My husband had a hard time finding a job, but I was luckier. After a month, my sister and I found jobs at an electronics company. I worked there for over sixteen years and was promoted several times. This was my best job in the United States.
The owner of the company was a good man, a humanitarian who enjoyed seeing his workers progress in life. He paid for employees to attend college and offered free English classes three days a week after work. He took pride in the fact that it was an international company. People from Russia, Italy, Armenia, China, Vietnam, Japan, England, and many from Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala worked there. This is how I learned English. Everyone had to try speaking English, even if it wasn’t perfect, to communicate.
We also had frequent parties where everyone would bring food from their culture to share. I think that diversity is one of the greatest things about this country. It’s beautiful.
Unfortunately, when the owner died, his brother-in-law took over. He was a very different kind of boss, only caring about production and profits. He quickly let go of long-time employees to hire cheaper labor. I was one of the people he fired. Because of the repetitive nature of my work, I had developed tendonitis in my elbow. When I asked for a table to rest my arm, he fired me.
I fell in love with this country for welcoming me with open arms and giving my family stability. As an immigrant, I never regretted leaving El Salvador. This country allows people to work hard and move ahead in life. I am grateful for the freedom to speak my mind, defend my rights politely, and live without fear.
America has provided my children with educational opportunities that were impossible in El Salvador. Services for disabled people are far better here. For example, Juanita’s school offered transportation or a teacher at home if she couldn’t attend because of her disability—services only available to millionaires in El Salvador.
Even after twenty-six years in the United States, I identify strongly as a Salvadoran woman. I cherish my roots—folklore, history, customs, and environment. Visiting El Salvador makes me feel comfortable, happy, and welcomed. Life moves slower there, less stressful, though services are more limited and harder for older adults or those with disabilities.
I moved to Los Angeles at seventeen, two weeks after graduating high school. I didn’t want to leave because I had finally made friends and had college plans. I cried a lot, but the move turned out to be the best thing that could have happened.
Two months after arriving, we got our own home and didn’t have to live with relatives long. The move helped me become independent. I learned to navigate by bus, get a job, and make friends. In the fall of 1988, I enrolled at Los Angeles City College and met Ana, another Salvadoran who opened my mind to politics. Later, at the University of Southern California, I began processing the Civil War memories that had been buried inside me.
In a class on Central and South American politics, we watched a documentary on the Civil War in El Salvador. I had seen the images before—they were my life. Footage of people being shot, nuns being killed, guerillas taking over the cathedral, burning buildings, and violent protests hit me like a ton of bricks. I realized many of the people filmed were likely dead.
All the fears of my childhood returned: fear that my parents wouldn’t return home, that my school would be destroyed, that friends would be killed. Life in El Salvador had once been simple and happy, but the war had shattered that innocence.
Initially, I couldn’t talk about my experiences, but when classmates made careless remarks about “those countries” and “their wars,” I spoke up. This moment motivated me to study foreign policy and learn about other cultures.
In 2001, I earned a Bachelor's degree in International Relations and Spanish. I chose Spanish because of my love for literature and writing. While I was initially afraid to write in English, I became an excellent writer in Spanish, connecting more deeply to my culture and the Latino community.
For several years, I worked as a paralegal at the Working People’s Law Center in downtown Los Angeles, helping people move forward despite challenges. My ultimate goal is to become a writer and share my stories.
I live in the back of my parents’ house in a mostly Salvadoran neighborhood. My brother and his family live next door. I visit my parents for meals and spend quality time with them. Even as adults, my parents continue to care for us.
Family is central to our lives. My parents cared for my grandparents until they passed, and my brother and I feel the same responsibility. Our culture emphasizes closeness, support, and maintaining family traditions.
For a long time, I didn’t know where I belonged. Now, I am comfortable in my own skin—part Salvadoran, part American. I cherish my Salvadoran culture, speak Spanish at home, and maintain my traditions. I am also grateful for American freedoms: the right not to marry, the ability to criticize the government, access to education, transportation, and independence despite my disability.
I have become attached to the United States, a country of opportunity. If you work hard and stay positive, you can achieve your goals. There are no limits here.