María Luisa Onody was born on June 21, 1960, in the state of Durango in central Mexico. When she was four years old, her father, Catarino Sarinana, left their home for the first time and began traveling to the United States in search of better job opportunities. Catarino continued making this trip every year for the next forty-one years, stopping only in 2007 at the age of seventy for health reasons.
Maria joined her father in Los Angeles for the first time when she was ten years old and, like her father, continued making this journey many more times. Maria currently lives in Los Angeles with her husband, Laszlo, and her two daughters, Fiorela and Michelle Garcia, who, like their mother and grandfather, spent much of their childhoods traveling back and forth between Durango and Los Angeles.
________________


Historical Note:
Mexican people were living in the western and southern parts of North America well before the United States existed. Until the signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo at the conclusion of the Mexican-American War (1846-1848), a large part of the southwest belonged to Mexico, including the land that would become California and Texas, along with parts of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Nevada. The treaty gave this land to the United States in exchange for $15 million. Shortly after, the United States purchased what is now southern Arizona and New Mexico for $10 million. This is known as the Gadsden Purchase.
Over the past century, Mexican immigration has ebbed and flowed, depending mostly on the economic needs of the United States and Mexico. Both countries benefit from immigrant labor. United States employers often exploit Mexican workers, paying low wages without benefits, while the Mexican economy prospers from the money workers send home. According to Mexico's Central Bank, the Mexican economy took in $23.9 billion in 2007 in remittances, Mexico's second largest source of revenue after petroleum.
The first significant wave of immigration came during and after the Mexican Revolution of 1910. A strong economy in the United States and the violence of the Revolution drove thousands of Mexicans to the United States. Between 1910 and 1930, the number of immigrants from Mexico tripled, going from 200,000 to 600,000. During World War II, there was once again a need for workers, especially farm workers. This resulted in the establishment of the "bracero program," which allowed millions of Mexican men to come to the United States to work on short-term labor contracts. Approximately 4.5 million Mexican workers came to work under this program, which lasted from 1942 to 1964.
Today, there are approximately 20 million people of Mexican origin living in the United States. More than 25 percent of all Mexican immigrants have come since 2000. Most are men of working age who, like those who preceded them, come to find work to support their families back home. A news article in the San Diego Union Tribune dated July 5, 2007, noted that 47 percent of Mexico's population suffers from poverty at various levels depending on the region, with 18.2 percent living in "extreme poverty," defined as too poor to buy sufficient food. In his September 2007 State of the Union Address, Mexican President Felipe Calderón blamed the people's plight on the Mexican government for failing to build an economy that offers all of its people good jobs and a decent education.
________________


María Begins Her Story
My Grandparents
My grandfather (my mother's father), Pascual Espinoza, was born in the state of Zacatecas in central Mexico in 1912. He started working in the fields when he was five or six years old and never went to school or learned how to read or write. My grandparents were very poor, and at that time it was common for young children to go to work to help the family. My grandfather worked as a migrant worker until he was sixty years old, and when he could no longer do this work, he and my grandmother, Nicanora Debora, started a small business selling candies to make ends meet.
My grandfather was a very happy and funny man who loved to tell jokes and dance. I remember that he would put on different kinds of music like rancheras (cowboy songs), and the family would all dance around the room. I think my grandmother went to elementary school because she once told me that she had a pizarrón (blackboard) in her home. She and my grandfather had fifteen children together, but only five survived.
My memory of my grandmother is that she was always at home taking care of the children and the house. My grandparents lived on a small ranch outside the city of Zacatecas, and when I was a child, we often visited them. It was a very peaceful place with lots of animals like chickens, pigs, and donkeys. My grandfather loved taking us around town on his donkeys. I especially liked spending Easter with my grandparents. They always prepared a special dinner of gorditas with chili, beans, and cheese inside; traditional desserts; and red, yellow, and green tortillas.
My grandparents and their children traveled two or three times a year from Zacatecas to Durango, which is north of Zacatecas, to work in the fields. They picked cotton in Durango, grapes in another city, and tomatoes in another. When they began traveling, they didn't have cars or buses, so the whole family walked from city to city with their donkey. My grandfather would tell me, "Don't get lost when I take the bus." During vacations from school, I often spent time with them. It was so calm. I remember we all stayed in one small room with a tiny kitchen and a chimney. There was no light and no bathroom, and we all slept together on the concrete floor. I loved that.
My other grandfather (my father's father), Catarino Sarinana Pereira, was born in Durango, Mexico, around 1917. He was an unhappy and distant man. Neither my father nor I had a close relationship with him. My father's mother, Agustina Ledezma, was born in Texas, United States, but I don't know when she was born or what part of Texas she was from. I don't know anything about her life because she died when my father was a few months old.
________________


My Parents
My mother, Hortencia Sarinana, was born in Zacatecas, Mexico, in 1939. She was one of five children. She had one sister and three brothers. Her father (my grandfather) sent her to school, but she only went for a short time because she didn't like school. She never learned how to read or write, and I think that later in life she regretted this.
When she was a child, she was a tomboy who preferred to stay outside and climb trees instead of going to school. Her parents were very strict with her. She couldn't leave the house or wear makeup. She wanted to cut her hair, but her parents wouldn't let her.
Historical Note:
 The name Zacatecas belongs to the indigenous people who lived there before the Spanish came in the 1500s. The Spanish took over the city and transported Zacatecas' silver all over the world. Mining is no longer important. Tourism is now the primary industry in this city of over 122,889 people.
My mother started working in the fields when she was seven years old and spent the rest of her childhood traveling with her family from city to city to work. She didn't like this work, but she had no choice. Like many other children at that time, she had to help her family. It is still common to see children as young as eight working in the fields. Working in the fields was hard. She was afraid of snakes, and when she wasn't working hard enough, people would hit her or pull her braids.
My mother never wanted me to work in the fields as she did. She wanted me to be able to go out with my friends to dances and parties. She couldn't do this when she was young and wanted me to have these experiences, but I have always been shy and reserved. I never wanted that kind of life.
My father, Catarino Sarinana, was born in Durango, Mexico, in 1937. When his mother died, his father remarried. My father was raised by his stepmother, who never had any children of her own. She loved my father, but I never heard my father call her "Mother." I really don't know very much about my father's early life because while I was growing up, he was always in Los Angeles working, but I don't think he had a very happy childhood. He always wanted a better life for his children. He wanted his children to go to school and have more opportunities than he did.
My parents got married when my mother was fifteen and my father was seventeen. By this time, my mother was working as a housekeeper, and one day as she was walking home from work, she met my father. They started talking and eventually fell in love and moved in together. One day after they were living together, my father came home from work, grabbed my mother, and told her they were going to church to get married. That day all marriages were free. My mother was in her apron washing dishes at the time, so she didn't even have time to get ready. I'm pretty sure that my mom wanted a big wedding because she always loved parties, but they didn't have enough money for that. My parents have been married for over fifty years.
________________


My mom had eleven children, five boys and six girls, but three died shortly after they were born. She had a baby every two years. The oldest is my brother Catarino, followed by Margarito who died, me, my sisters Agustina, Ofelia, Lupita, and Ramona (also known as Monis), my brother Gerardo, who died while we were living in Los Angeles, my brother Gerardo, who was named after my brother who died, Alma Rosa, and Juan, who also died. As the oldest daughter, I was responsible for taking care of my younger sisters and brothers and helping my mother with all the housework. In my culture, the oldest daughter is like a second mom, and the oldest son helps the family financially. I never resented that. This was a normal part of life. I was happy growing up.
The only thing I didn't like was when my mom would leave me alone with one of the babies. I remember once when I was in fifth grade, my mother asked me to cook dinner because she was busy washing all the clothes. I did a horrible job and she was very angry at me. My father pretended to like what I cooked. My mother was always very strict with me and got mad at me for everything. Maybe she was strict with me because her parents were the same way with her. My father was different. He always protected me.
________________


I grew up in a small city in the state of Durango called Gomez Palacio, which is an industrial city with a lot of factories, including a soap factory where many people in the city work. When I was five years old, my parents moved from a house on the outskirts of the city to one closer to the downtown area. In Mexico, most people own their own homes. There are not a lot of apartments like here. The house was pink and pistachio green. My father must have loved those colors because he's painted every house he's owned with the same ones. He also loves green mosaic tiles because he also has them in all of his houses. Our house had three small bedrooms, all painted yellow: one for my parents, one for my oldest brother, and the third for all the girls.
Mornings were always my favorite time. I loved being at the table with food and all the family. Sometimes there were so many people eating breakfast that the children had to sit on the floor to eat.
Growing up, I always knew that we were poor. We didn't have many clothes or shoes, and sometimes we had to go to the pawn shop when we didn't have money. This wasn't unusual; most people in our community were struggling, and there were many people worse off than we were. It never bothered me that we were poor. We enjoyed what we had. We were a close community. We knew everyone in the neighborhood, and everyone knew us. Everybody watched out for the children. We always felt safe. Even when families move, which isn't too often, there is always someone who stays, so you never lose track of anyone.
It's different here. People move around a lot. Nobody knows your history. Nobody knows anything about you.
________________


I loved school and always got good grades, but my mother never encouraged me to go further than elementary school. She didn't think women needed an education because their role in life was to get married and take care of their children and home. It was different for men. They needed an education because they had to support their family.
It's funny because out of all my brothers and sisters, I was the only one who wanted to go further in school, and because I was a girl, I couldn't. My father had different ideas. He wanted all of us to have an education. He always loved to read and learn, but he wasn't able to complete school because when he was young, he had to work to help support the family. But after he and my mom got married, he went back to school to finish elementary school. It was common in Mexico for people to complete school as adults.
I completed primary and secondary school. I wanted to go to preparatory school to continue my studies, but I knew this would be hard on my family because preparatory school cost a lot of money. The decision was taken out of my hands. When I was sixteen, we went to Los Angeles to live for two months, and when I returned to Mexico I had missed registration for preparatory school. My only option was to enroll in Escuela Normal, which prepares you to become a teacher. I was disappointed. I wanted to become someone important like a lawyer. Teaching wasn't my dream.
________________


My father started coming to the United States to work in 1964 when I was about four years old and continued doing this every year while I was growing up. Sometimes he would stay seven or eight months, other times just a few months, and he never went at the same time of the year. We knew he was getting ready to leave when we saw him packing his suitcase. When he left, he would tell us, "Be good." We all cried. It was hard on all of us. My parents never sat us down to explain why he was leaving. Parents didn't explain these things to children.
My mother never wanted my father to go to the United States, which she still brings up to him. It was hard on her. She didn't have anyone to confide in, and she couldn't call him because we didn't have a telephone. I wrote letters for my mother because she never learned how to read or write, but my father didn't always answer her right away. Sometimes my father couldn't send money home.
I remember hearing stories in the neighborhood about husbands who would leave Mexico, find another wife and family, and stop sending money back home. I remember feeling scared whenever I would see my mother smoking because I had a feeling that meant we were having financial problems. Now I understand how much pressure she was under, but at the time I didn't understand why she was moody and always yelling.
When we were out of money, I would go to the pawn shop to sell things like blenders, toasters, and one time, my dad's guitar. My mother had a line of credit at the local corner store, which was common in our community, so when my father couldn't send money, she could buy groceries on credit. Sometimes my mother sold candies, sodas, and cookies out of our house to make a little extra money. These little businesses were pretty common in the community. Women would bring in a little money for groceries or shoes by selling things out of their homes, like ice cream, beans, covers for notebooks, and hair bows.
________________


Most of the time, my father worked in Beverly Hills as a tailor in large department stores like Neiman Marcus and Nordstrom. He had been trained to be a tailor in Mexico and owned a tailor shop near our home, but he felt he had to go to Los Angeles because he earned more money there. Many times my father would tell us, "This will be the last time." But we needed the money, and once you start coming here, it's hard to stop. You have to understand that people in Mexico are poor. They don't have the things we have here. My father wanted us to have a better life. I think if he had not come to the United States to work and had stayed in Mexico, he wouldn't have been able to buy his family a house or send his children to school.
My father tried to make up for being gone so much of the time by bringing back as many appliances as he could. I remember that he brought back an industrial sewing machine, and a radio, television set, and VCR. The ladies in the neighborhood would come to our house at night to watch novelas (soap operas) on our television set, and the kids would come during the day to watch cartoons. The only thing he couldn't bring back was a stove. He couldn't fit it on his lap.
He never expressed how sad he was that he missed so many things in his children's lives. He kept things inside. My father missed out on a lot. He was home for most holidays, like Easter and Christmas, but he often missed our birthdays because there were so many of us. When I turned fifteen, my father was in Los Angeles. In Mexico, when girls turn fifteen they have their quinceañera, which is an important tradition the day a girl becomes a woman. Girls wait their whole lives for this day. I wanted my father to be with me so I waited one year until I was sixteen to have my party. We didn't have a big party, just dinner and a few friends, but I felt it was important that my father be with me on that day.
________________


My First Trip to the United States
The first time I came to the United States, I was ten years old. I guess you could say that I was following a family tradition that began when my grandparents began traveling back and forth from Zacatecas to Durango to work in the fields. My father continued that tradition when he began traveling back and forth from Mexico to Los Angeles for work. Then when my mother became tired of this, she told my father that he had to take the family with him, so we all joined him on the bus. I am pretty sure that one of the reasons I got married was that I didn't want to travel anymore. I wanted to end this tradition.
Coming to the United States was a big adventure, and we were all really excited. We came by bus, which takes twenty-four hours, and I remember feeling really scared because the roads on the Sierra Madre are very windy and narrow.
We had permits to cross the border, but only for a few days, so we could only bring a few suitcases for the whole family. I remember that I took three changes of clothes, the best ones I had. We moved into an apartment near MacArthur Park where my father had been living. Everything was big and scary.
Most of the time, we stayed in the apartment because my mother didn't want us to go outside. Maybe she was worried about family. Ily and I went to Bakersfield because there was no place to live in Los Angeles. My mother and four sisters stayed in Mexico. My mother didn't like living in the United States because she felt that it was too dangerous. Mexico was her home. She felt safe there. While I was in Bakersfield, I stayed with my father's compadre (the person who baptizes your child, now used to describe a close friend) for two months and worked in the fields picking grapes. Every day we woke up at 4 a.m. and started work at being really hungry at lunch. I knew this was only temporary until we moved back to Los Angeles to start again, but I liked the feeling of working hard during the day and insisting, I couldn't tell my father though he was upset.
When I returned to Los Angeles, my family moved from apartment to apartment to apartment, from job to job to job. Things are a blur. It was crazy. I had several different jobs in downtown Los Angeles. One time I sold magazines, another time jeans, and another time knickknacks. During this time we went back and forth to Mexico at least three different times. We always kept our clothes in Mexico and took whatever we could in our suitcase. When we were here, we used whatever clothes we could get. Sometimes my family would give us clothes to wear. We only had what we absolutely needed. Just the basics. We never had enough of anything. But we never planned to live here; we were just here to work and go back to Mexico. I felt disconnected.
When I was about twenty-four, I decided to stay in Los Angeles. I was tired of all the traveling around. I felt disconnected. I just wanted to be stable and live in one place, and I thought that there would be more opportunities for a better life here than in Mexico. I knew that if I stayed here, I would need to learn English. Nobody in my family had learned English. My parents didn't think there was any reason since we were only here to work and would always return to Mexico to live.
I enrolled in adult school with three of my sisters. It was funny. When the four of us would come to class, the teacher would always say, "The whole family came to class." This is where I met my future husband Andrés, who was twenty-nine and still single. At least that's what he told me. He told me that he had not met the right girl because he had been traveling back and forth to Mexico so much. But then I found out from his neighbor that he was married and that his wife was living in Mexico. I told him we were finished, but he kept insisting and insisting, and since I was in love with him, I agreed to get married. I knew we couldn't be married in a church because he was already married. I was afraid to tell my father, but I knew I had to. He was angry at me and wanted to send me back to Mexico. He told me that I had disappointed him. This was the first time I had gone against my parents' wishes. We got married in the courthouse in 1985. None of my family came to my wedding.
I got pregnant right away. My oldest daughter, Fiorela, was born on February 27, 1987, and my second daughter, Michelle, was born a year later on May 9. My husband and I argued a lot. Two of his nephews came to live with us, and even though they worked, they didn't help out financially. Also my husband had to help his family in Mexico. After our last fight, he stopped talking to me. I told him we should try to work things out, but he didn't want to, and after five years of marriage, he moved out. After he left, the only thing I could do was to move back to Mexico to live with my parents. I felt it was impossible to raise my two daughters alone, and I knew that my parents would never allow me to live on my own with my daughters. This is my culture. Family takes care of each other. Nobody lives alone.
Life was very difficult for me in Mexico. We didn't have any money, and I couldn't work because I had to take care of my daughters who were two and three years old. I wanted them to go to kindergarten, but in Mexico families have to pay for kindergarten, and I didn't have the money. I knew my daughters could go to kindergarten for free here, so a year or so after moving to Mexico, we moved back to the United States to live with my sister Ofelia's family in San Pedro, which is south of downtown Los Angeles. We stayed with my sister for two years and then moved back to Mexico to live with my parents.
Every time my parents would come, they would push me to come back with them to Mexico. They thought it would be better for the kids.
After about two years in San Pedro, we moved back to Mexico. We stayed about a year and then moved back to the United States again. We moved in with my sister Ofelia and her family who had moved to Los Angeles, and my daughters went to the local elementary school. In 1999, when Michelle was eleven and Fiorela was twelve, we moved back to Mexico again. My daughters were happy in Mexico. They loved being around family. But I couldn't work because I had to take care of the kids. My mother couldn't help because she had high blood pressure. I didn't think I could make it financially. I was spending the money I had brought with me too fast. Also I saw that it wasn't good for my daughters to have so many changes in their lives, and that if we continued this way, going back and forth all the time, they would never learn English, and I knew that if they didn't learn English, they would never succeed.
After six or seven months in Mexico, I decided we needed to move back to the United States, but this time for good. I felt bad. My daughters cried a lot. They wanted to stay in Mexico. But I felt I had no choice but to come back. I wanted a better life for my daughters, and I thought there were more opportunities in the United States. If we had stayed in Mexico, I don't know if they would have gone to college. Probably they would be working in low-paying jobs.
This time, we moved to the city of Rosemead, where my sister Ofelia, her husband, and two children were now living. We stayed there for a year and a half and then moved back to Los Angeles to live with my parents. My father never stopped coming here to work, but at some point my mother started to come with him even though she felt her home was in Mexico and never liked living here.
This time when my parents returned to Mexico, my daughters and I didn't go back with them. We stayed in the apartment in Los Angeles. This was the first time I had lived alone with my two daughters. I was forty-one; Michelle was thirteen and Fiorela was fourteen. I was scared. I had always done what my parents said. I didn't know if I could work and take care of everything, but I thought, "I have to do this." My daughters were older and it was time that we started to do our own thing.
Living in my parents' house meant following their rules, and living in my sisters' houses meant following their rules. Living alone with my daughters meant that I could set my own rules. For the first time in my life, I felt that I could do anything I wanted to do. I felt free. I felt independent. I was able to do what I wanted without anyone telling me what to do. I loved that. I especially loved spending weekends with my daughters.
I found a job at a small store in the neighborhood doing just about everything and anything they wanted me to do. Sometimes I was the cashier; other times I shelved merchandise or worked the floor. I worked seven or eight hours a day, six days a week, and then would go home and clean the house, cook, and take care of my daughters. I was happy. But it was hard to raise two daughters alone, especially without a car and language skills.
Language has been the hardest thing about living here. I hated the fact I couldn't help my daughters in school, and I felt embarrassed because I couldn't talk with their teachers. I had to ask my daughters to translate for me, which I didn't like. As a mom, it is my job to speak for them and to defend them. Not knowing English has made me feel frustrated and impotent.
I also worried about my daughters all the time. I was working long hours, and most of the time I couldn't be with them when they came home from school. My biggest worry was that my daughters would become like other American girls. They wanted to become more Americanized to fit in, which is natural, but I was scared when I saw young girls skipping school and hanging out on the streets with their friends and boyfriends. I was scared about the dangers outside and the people who could influence them. Kids here have too much freedom. Both parents work and there isn't anyone at home after school to take care of the kids.
Everybody does what they want. My daughters and I fought a lot. I wanted them to respect the things that I taught them, like listening to their parents and obeying the rules of the house, the same values my mother taught me. My daughters wanted more freedom. It was very difficult.
My Second Husband
For many years, my daughters were the people who gave me the strength to keep fighting. I never thought I would get married again. I had decided to raise my daughters alone and then maybe when my daughters were older and out of the house, then I might meet someone and maybe get married. But I thought that by that time, I would be too old. Then a few years ago a friend from church introduced me to a man named Laszlo, who was from Hungary. At first I thought we would just be friends. I always felt I would be with someone from my own country who shared the same culture, but then as we got to know each other and I felt comfortable with him, that didn't matter. Laszlo turned out to be the man of my dreams. My family never cared that he was from another culture. They thought I had the right to be happy.
In the beginning, my daughters had a hard time accepting Laszlo, which I thought was natural because they had never seen me with a man, but I knew that with time they would grow to like him because he was a good man. But I also told them that if they had any problems with Laszlo, I would leave him and things would go back to the way they were before. Laszlo and I lived together for two years and then we got married.
María's Reflections
I consider myself a Mexican because I was born in Mexico and my parents raised me with certain customs and values, like respecting what parents say. But the more time I spend here, the more American I feel. This is natural. With experience comes change.
When I was growing up, I thought that my role in life was to get married and take care of my family and home. I no longer think that a woman should get married just because that is what is expected of her. When I was growing up, my parents would not let me out of the house to study or travel without being married. When I see my daughters going to the university and participating in the community, I think back and realize that I didn't have those opportunities. My mother didn't give me that freedom. My mother didn't let me be who I am. I'm trying to be different with my daughters. I want them to be who they want to be. I do believe in love and would like my daughters to find someone who loves and respects them for who they are; but if they don't, my daughters will still have their education and careers. My mother wouldn't agree. She would probably say: "I don't know why you think like that. That is not the way I raised you. That is not what I taught you."
In June of 2006, I graduated from high school, and in the fall I enrolled at California State University at Northridge. My major is child development, but I've also been thinking about studying political science. My interest in political science developed in high school where I became active in political campaigns and volunteered at City Hall. I began to see the inequities that exist for minorities living in the United States. Many Latinos are under-represented in our political system, and I would like to see that change. Latinos are also the least likely to vote, although slowly we are beginning to step up.
________________


Michelle's Reflections
I feel that I am part of two very different cultures. The American part is that I am very independent. I have my goals. I want to pursue them, and I am encouraged to pursue them. I am very determined. I am also proud of being Mexican. My heart and my soul are Mexican. But I don't think I could live in Mexico because my thinking is more American. Mexicans are raised to accept what they have and to be grateful for what they have, which is how my grandmother raised my mother and my mother raised my sister and me. Americans are different. They feel that they can accomplish anything in life. They are encouraged to pursue their dreams. And they always want more, more, more.
I was talking with my cousin about my dreams and plans, and when I asked about hers, she had no response. She doesn't aspire to any dream. I think that is sad.
But I have also noticed that children of immigrants sometimes put down their own culture. They think that American culture is the "right culture," and acting American is the "right" way to act. They want to be accepted and liked, which is natural, but they get so carried away with material things and running their own successful lives that they don't look around and see how they can help their families and communities. They have become individualistic. They only care about themselves and only focus on their needs and wants. They don't see that there are people who don't have what we have. Mexican culture does not support the idea of individualism. We were raised to always put the needs of our family first. In Mexico the family is everything.
I would like to get married in the future, but I feel that it would be hard to find someone who can accept me. I am very independent, and most Latino boys are raised in the machismo way. In the past, machismo was not considered to be a bad thing. It meant being able to protect and support your family. Today, machismo is viewed as being superior to women. A man with machismo is considered to be a sexist who wants to control his relationship. I do not want that. I'm looking for someone who respects me as a person and accepts and encourages me with my career. I want to have a relationship where we can both learn to trust each other and make decisions as a couple. I want someone I can share my life and dreams with. Maybe I'm asking for too much, but here in the United States, men and women are equal and have the same opportunities. Women can choose to stay at home or continue with their profession. I will definitely continue with my education, and then if marriage comes, it comes, but if it doesn't, I'm okay with that.
I have many dreams. I want to graduate from college and continue with my Master's and obtain a doctorate in education or political science. Either way, I would like to work in education. I want to do positive things for my community and help people. I love the feeling of knowing you have helped people achieve and have a better life. When I see the struggles of low-income Latino families, it reminds me of what I went through with my mom. One of my dreams is to continue to travel and see new places. I would also love to help my cousin fulfill her dream to come here and go to school. I am pretty sure that if I had stayed in Mexico, my dreams would have been limited. I probably would have struggled to attend college, and since college is expensive, I would have picked something like secretarial work. It might have been important to marry and have a family.
I have gained so much by living here. My mom made the right choice in deciding to live here. She thought about her decision carefully. She wanted to go where my sister and I would have a better future, and she knew it would be easier and better for us in the United States. She is proud that I'm going to college but also a little nervous about my future. My grandfather is very proud that I am going to a university and working to become a professional. He has sacrificed a lot to give his family a better life.
It frustrates me that Americans don't see how hard Mexican people work. He told me, "I grew up in the fields. That's all I knew. You grew up in Los Angeles, where you can live a better life than most people in Mexico."