Thuynga's Story
Thuynga Nguyen was born in Nam Dinh, North Vietnam, on October 20, 1952. In 1954, after the communist regime took power from the French, Thuynga's family fled to South Vietnam. After the Vietnam War ended, life did not improve. Living under the communist government was difficult, especially because her husband had worked for the prior regime. In 1987, Thuynga, her husband, and two children in secret boarded a boat to Malaysia.
Crammed under the deck with seventy-five other refugees, they feared not only the ocean storms but also Thai pirates noted for robbing and raping women. After spending twenty months in Malaysia, they came to the United States, where they live today. Here is Thuynga's story.
________________


Historical Note:
 French influence in Vietnam goes back to the 1700s when French missionaries began arriving in Vietnam, but the French occupation did not begin until 1858. At that time, following several military conquests, the entire country of Vietnam came under French control and was renamed Indochina. Resistance to the occupation quickly developed, the first of any note being the establishment of the Vietnam Quoc Dan Dang Party. This was followed in 1941 by the emergence of the Viet Minh, which was an umbrella group of parties led by a young revolutionary named Ho Chi Minh.
During World War II, Japan invaded Vietnam. The Japanese kept in place the Vichy French colonial administration as its puppet government. In 1945, following the defeat of the Japanese, the Viet Minh proclaimed a provisional government in Hanoi. In that same year, the French sent the French Far East Expeditionary Corp to Vietnam to restore its rule, leading to the First Indochina War between the Viet Minh and the French forces. On May 8, 1954, the French were defeated after the battle of Dien Bien Phu. The Geneva Conference of 1954 ended France's occupation of Vietnam and divided the country in half at the seventeenth parallel. The communists took control of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) in the north, and the nationalists controlled the Republic of Vietnam in the south (RVN). The Geneva Accords also called for general elections in 1956 to unify the country, but fearing the possible victory of Ho Chi Minh, the United States and South Vietnam would not allow these elections to take place.
________________


My Parents
My father, Lich, was born in 1904, and my mother, Sen, in 1908. My parents were from different villages outside of the city of Nam Dinh in North Vietnam. This was a rural area, so probably their families had been farmers. Education was important in my father's family, and he finished high school, which was unusual at that time. Most children did not even finish elementary school. My father was a writer and poet, although he never published anything; he just wrote for fun. He was a very funny man, and his stories were passed on from family to family. Everyone loved listening to them because he could talk to any generation. He died in Vietnam when he was 101 years old. I was living in the United States.
My mother was fortunate to have a family who understood that if she could read and write, she would have more opportunities. At that time, only men went to school. Typically, when young girls reached seven or eight years of age, they were taking care of their younger brothers or sisters and helping to run the household so their parents could go out and make a living. My mom's family sent her to a tutor's house to study. She finished the third grade, just enough education to be able to work. During that time, women didn't have any expectations; they just followed their husbands. They really didn't have their own dreams.
My parents lived in a small community where everybody knew each other. Marriages were arranged at that time, and my grandfather had a friend who knew a family that had a son. They played matchmaker, and when my mother was sixteen and my father was twenty, they got married. My mother was very sweet and known in the community for her beauty.
My family was Catholic. My parents had thirteen children, including me, but three died before I was born, so I only grew up with ten. My mother's first child was born when she was seventeen and the last child when she was forty-three. There are twenty-six years between the oldest and youngest child. When I was born, one sister already had a family. I have a nephew who is older than I am.
In 1954, when I was two years old, my family fled to the south. When my father was a young man, he was part of a revolutionary group that was fighting against the French. He was a patriot who loved his country and wanted Vietnam to be run by Vietnamese, but he didn't believe in communism. Around this time, the communist leader, Ho Chi Minh, was rising in power, and some people confused communism with patriotism. When the group my father belonged to became communist, he resigned. He felt he had no choice but to leave the north. Millions of people were fleeing the north at this time. The government let people decide if they wanted to leave, but there was an unspoken pressure to stay. There were no ports where my family lived, so we had to travel to Hai Phong. We couldn't go as a family. People would have been suspicious. So, two of my brothers, a sister, and I went with my parents, and the four older brothers went with their school.
My father's brother was in a position to help my family escape. He was well off financially and could help with transportation. Because he had been recruited by the communists, he had knowledge about escape routes. He knew he should leave, but he also knew that because he was a prominent man, they would be looking for him. At that time, anyone with property was rounded up and put into jail. Even though he had helped the communists, there was no loyalty. He was still a landowner. He ended up dying in jail. Everyone in my mother's family moved to the south, and everyone in my father's family stayed in the north. We had absolutely no contact with my father's family until 1975, not even letters.
________________


My Life in South Vietnam
My family first moved to Dalat City (north of Saigon, now known as Ho Chi Minh City), and then in 1959, when I was seven years old, we moved to a neighborhood in Saigon. At that time, Saigon was not a big city. There weren't a lot of people. There were no big buildings at all. There weren't even many bicycles. Everyone in my neighborhood got along. If you were Catholic, you went to church, and if you were Buddhist, you went to temple. We coexisted. In Vietnam, the main religions are Catholic and Buddhism, but Buddhist ideas of respecting and honoring your ancestors became a big part of Vietnamese culture, and even people who weren't Buddhist honored their ancestors through prayer.
My father opened a small store, like a convenience store. It started out as a bookstore, but my father couldn't make enough business selling books, so he began to rent books instead, which wasn't very successful either. The store was in front of the first floor of our house. We had a living room, kitchen, and a bathroom in the back of the house. On the second floor, there was one large bedroom full of beds. I shared a bed with my sister. The boys shared a bigger bed.
For the first few years, I didn't go to school because my father home-schooled me. He taught me how to read, write, and do math, and he taught me French as well, which he had learned growing up in the north. All of my brothers and my sister went to Catholic school, and Vu, one of my brothers, became a priest. He left Vietnam in 1965 to study in France and never came back to live in Vietnam. In 1960, when I was eight, my parents sent two of my brothers and me to a Catholic boarding school in Vung Tau, which was about two hours from my house by car. I was there for three years and then came back home for high school.
Education was very important to my parents. We had many books at home, and my whole family loved to read. My brother and my father made all of us read one book a month. Sometimes my dad would pick out the book, but we had so many that sometimes we would pick our own. He would even make us write a report when we finished the book. Everybody in my family had to go to college.
They told us that if we had a good education, we would have a good job and a good life. In Vietnam, we say, "Parents give us the body, but teachers give us the mind and the knowledge." We teach our children that if they want a good life, they need to study, not to make money but to have knowledge so they can be good people.
The chaos lasted for about one month. Everything was closed. There was no order anywhere. There was trash everywhere. People who were supposed to clean it were gone. Even if they reported to work, who was going to pay them?
The streets were a mess. People did whatever they wanted. People set up shop wherever they wanted. There was no authority. Luckily we had enough food. In most houses there is usually a huge sack of rice and fish sauce. Slowly things got back to normal. At the time, I was so preoccupied with my baby that I didn't look too far into the future.
My Husband Goes to a Re-education Camp
After the Fall of Saigon, we didn't know what to expect. We knew we had lost the war, so we were waiting to see what would happen. After three months, the government put my husband in a re-education camp. The new government said that anyone who was a part of the old regime's military would have to report to them and would be sent away for ten days. For my husband, ten days turned into five years and one month. Many people died in the camps.
I didn't know where they took him. It was a long time before I got a letter from my husband, maybe three or four months later. There was no return address so I didn't know where it came from. It was a generic letter. It didn't say anything personal. He was unable to write about what was going on. Sometimes the government sent a letter telling us we could send a care package to the prisoners. They gave us a ticket. We would prepare what we wanted to send and bring it to the post office. We didn't know where it was going. We just had that ticket and somehow the package made its way to the camp. In camp, they only fed the prisoners rice, so I would send anything that had a long shelf life like dried shrimp, dried shredded pork, and sugar. Also, pork fat was a high commodity.
After about a year, my family was finally allowed to visit my husband. I went with my daughter, his older sister and younger sister. Even though we were from the city and had good clothes, we had to change into country clothing that was more suitable for visiting.
We had to wear black pants and a normal shirt, nothing fancy. We took with us whatever we could carry, the more the better, because we didn't know when we would see him again. The first time I saw him he was really thin and very dark because he had been working in the field clearing out jungle so the government would have more land. It was sad to see that the government would use his labor and not give him anything in exchange. They wouldn't even feed him properly.
The way I got through this was to have hope. You had to hope that your loved ones would be able to learn whatever they needed to learn so the government would release them. You lived day to day for that day. Usually I would see the same people making that journey to the camps. There was a feeling of camaraderie and shared experience that helped us get through this time. We all became friendly, and through these connections, we would try and get more information about our loved ones. Many people didn't know what camps their loved ones were in, so when we would talk with our husbands, we were able to get news back to people on the other side. We didn't have permission to visit every month. Sometimes we would see him every month for four or five months and then nothing. Sometimes they would move him. Then we would receive a letter telling us where he was.
Life in Saigon after the War
In the beginning, the family was okay. I was still working at my old job. I was fortunate. All my friends who had husbands in the army or who worked for the previous government were fired. There was a law that if you were a wife of a former soldier, you were not allowed to work. But the vice president of the department, who had been a computer analyst in Russia, wanted to keep all of us in the computer group together. We could not live off the salary, but it was better than nothing at all. Work allowed me to stay in the city of Saigon. If you didn't work, you had to leave the city.
When the war ended, people who sensed there was trouble took their money out of the bank. After a while, the government changed the money so our money was worthless. We had nothing. In five years I had no new clothes. Things became harder with my husband's family. In the beginning, we had a good life so everybody felt at ease, but after 1975, there were so many difficulties. Earning a living was difficult. Everybody felt so much stress. It was really hard.
Sometimes we had to sell things for money. Every time my friend went to see her husband in the re-education camp, she had to sell her rings, jewelry and clothing to buy food for him and to pay for transportation. Everyone was very frugal, not knowing what was going to happen. You used whatever you had. You never bought frivolous things; you used your money for food and necessities. You lived day to day. I had to just wait for my husband to come back. What else was there for me to do?
In the summer of 1980, my husband got out of the camp. They released him early in the morning. By the time he got home, it was afternoon and I was still working. When I got home, I didn't know he was there because he was in the back of the house; then someone told me, "He's home. He's home."
1982: My Daughter and I Go to Prison
Within a few days after my husband was released, people were coming to us asking him to help people escape. They thought that because my husband had been a naval officer, he would know which water routes to use. The cost of escape was three or four bricks of gold, but because my husband could help, our family was allowed to go for free. We tried to escape as a family seven times, and my husband tried on his own four or five more times. We were caught three times. Two times they took my daughter and me to prison, but we got out the next day because I had a child with me. The last time, they put my daughter and me in prison for four months. My daughter was five years old. My husband had tried to escape with us, but when we were captured, he was able to get away because he was in a different group. My daughter and I were in the first group to go, and he was in the last group.
I was processed for prison at about 6 p.m. The jail closed each day at 4, and they had already handed out the last meal. They didn't give me or my daughter any food. Once I was in the holding cell, the women prisoners gave us their leftover food. They put all the women and children in one big room. If the child was a daughter, she would always stay with the mother. A son older than eight would go with his dad. If there was no father, the boy would have to live by himself in the jail.
The cell was four walls of cement. It held up to seventy people, but if more were caught, they would all be put in the cell. We were just packed in there. We had to rearrange ourselves so that everyone would fit on the floor. Sometimes there would be a foot next to your head. Everybody put a bit of cloth on the cement to make it more comfortable. There was a small hole for a restroom in one corner of the cell. It wasn't covered; it was just raised so that water could flow down like a drain. It was very dirty. Normally we would only use that at night. The last people who arrived at the prison would have to sleep near the drainage hole. During the day we would use the restrooms outside. We took showers together. There was no privacy. There were a lot of fleas. Usually when new people came in they were the main targets of the fleas. The joke was "the fleas are tired of us; they are getting some fresh blood."
Almost all of the women were in jail because they were trying to escape. I became close to one woman who had the same name as my daughter, Uyen. She was young and really cute. She was sentenced to eight years in prison for organizing people to escape. I was close to her because she was younger and hadn't been married, but she really loved my daughter and took care of her. There was another woman who was there for the same reasons. She was a little older and had a husband. She and the other women were the "heads" of the prison because they had been there the longest. They took care of things. They organized things.
In the morning, we had fifteen minutes of exercise. Then we would clean up and go to fetch water from a nearby well. Fetching water from the well was a big thing. For one thing, it gave you a chance to leave the cell. Also the men's prison was on the way to the well and there was hope that maybe your husband or family members might see you. There was no way otherwise to know whether your husband or wife was still in the same prison because they didn't notify you. You just hoped that someone saw you and would communicate that to other prisoners. After we brought the water back, we would shower and clean up. We also used the water to clean the prison. We had to sleep there. We had to keep things tidy. We did what we could to get through.
In the beginning, my family couldn't visit us, but after about two weeks they allowed them to send care packages. When they finally let the family visit, there was a gate between us so we couldn't hug each other. The only way we could touch was to put our hands through the gates. My husband never came to visit because it was too dangerous. Three months after I arrived, when I was taking a shower, some older women told me they thought I was pregnant. I had some discomfort, but I thought that was because I was sleeping in a cramped space on a concrete floor. I missed a period but figured that it was because I was worried and stressed. I was probably about four months pregnant when I was released, but I wasn't released because I was pregnant. The rule was that all women without children and who were between the ages of sixteen and fifty-five had to work in the fields for at least two years before being released. Since I had a child and because they needed space for new inmates, they released me. My son, An, was born in 1983.
When I got out of prison, I knew we had to leave Vietnam. We were at rock bottom. I knew that if we tried to escape, there was a chance we would die, but it didn't matter. I had heard stories of women who had been raped by Thai pirates, but that didn't matter either. Other than death, we couldn't get any lower. We had to take the chance. We felt there was no future for our children. We lost the war, they won the war. There was no way our children could go to college or start their own life. There was really no choice. We had to leave.
For the next five years, my husband and I continued working, waiting for the right time to escape. My husband took whatever jobs he could find because each time we tried to escape he couldn't go back to what he was doing before. One time he was a woodworker, another a goldsmith. I stayed in my old job until the last time I tried to escape and was sent to prison. I think they knew all along that I was trying to escape, but they always let me stay anyway. But after the last time, they fired me after one week because I didn't come back to work. When I was released from prison, I went to work in a sewing factory.
In 1987, one of my husband's friends came to us with another plan to escape. At first my husband wasn't in favor of leaving. He was tired. He had already tried to escape many times, and each time he suffered many hardships. He was working as a goldsmith at the time and was making a decent living. Also, he had heard news about an immigration program for people who had been in the re-education program. He felt that he would definitely qualify and thought it would be safer for the family if they waited.
I talked him into going. The plan was different from the others. The organizers rented a bus from the Viet Cong, so if the government flagged down the bus, the driver would explain that it was a tourist bus. I knew that the government would ask the driver for paperwork, not the passengers. And I thought that if we went to the location and there was no ship, we could just turn around and go home. It seemed like a safer plan than the others.
By this time, I only had one sister, two brothers and my parents left in Vietnam. My sister Huong was living in Tennessee. She left for America the day Saigon fell. My brother Vu, who had become a priest, left for France in 1965, Hoa went in 1969, Rao escaped in 1970, and my younger brother Duy left in 1974. In 1980, Rao started paperwork for my parents to go to France but my mother passed away in 1981. My father ended up going to France in 1983 and lived there for ten years before coming back to Vietnam.
My Family Escapes from Vietnam
On December 20, 1987, we left our home very early in the morning. The sky was still dark. We walked a block and a bus picked us up on the corner. The bus went to different locations where it picked up five or six people at each stop, a total of about fifty. Each person had one small bag. My husband and I brought one change of clothes and a few changes of clothes and food for my children. My son was four and my daughter twelve at that time. My son didn't know what was going on, but because my daughter had been in prison with me, she knew something was going on. It was exciting for her. She saw it as an adventure.
We arrived at Can Tho City at 4 p.m. and then rode around the city for about three hours until it was dark. The organizers separated us by groups. My group included my family and two other people who came on at the same bus stop. We were dropped off at a site where a person was waiting to take us to someone's home. When we got there, the owner said that six people were too many, and sent two people to a different house. We stayed at the house until we received instructions to move to another house, where there were about ten people. With each move, we were making our way to the shore to board the ship. Once at the shore, about thirty people boarded a small motorboat that took us to the large ship. Seventy-five people, including twenty children, were on the ship. Four people steered the boat, including my husband. They were our crew.
When we finally boarded, it was dark. I remember that it was a little eerie, pretty scary. There were smaller boats on the sea, mostly merchant ships. We had to hide under the deck to make sure that no one suspected that there were a lot of people on our ship because the word might get out. My family was fortunate because we had gotten on the ship early when there was still a lot of room. As more people got on, it became cramped. My daughter sat next to me, and when she was tired, she would lean on me. My son sat on my lap. Most children sat on their mother's lap; they didn't get their own space. I remember that I couldn't move my leg. If I needed to move, I had to ask the people next to me. We were all in this together so we knew we had to help each other to survive. It hurt so much. If you were in the middle, there was no place to lean.
We had to be completely quiet. The children could not make any sounds. Sometimes we couldn't even breathe. Some people gave medicine to the children to help them sleep, but my children were so tired they didn't need medicine. We had some rice and water and dry fish, but no one wanted to eat. There were so many people that it became suffocating. When the people steering the ship thought it was safe, they would crack the deck a little to get some fresh air, but it was just a little crack of air. When it was dangerous, they would shut it again. I remember the feeling of being suffocated.
When we set sail, I noticed that the water on the shore was light green. People said that once we were out to sea, the water would turn blue, so when we saw blue water, everyone was happy and thought we were on our way out of Vietnamese waters. Then after a while we saw the water turning a little green again, and nobody knew what was going on. My husband was using the ship's navigation system to steer the ship, but it turned out that it was broken, which meant that all this time we were drifting back to the shore. Everyone was terrified. At that point, my husband had to navigate by the stars to get back to the ocean. He knew how to do this because he had been a naval officer in Vietnam.
Once we hit the ocean, there was a huge storm. There was a lot of motion. The ship was rocking back and forth. A huge wave hit the ship. Water was coming in everywhere. Everyone got wet. Nobody ate; nobody went to the restroom; nobody moved. My kids were really tired so they fell asleep. Then a second wave hit. Everybody grabbed buckets to get the water out of the ship. People were yelling and screaming. I was so scared that I passed out until the next morning.
When I woke up the next morning, the sea was still and it was sunny again. We were out of Vietnamese waters. We opened the deck so people could get some fresh air and use the bathroom. Everybody woke up slowly, so there wasn't one moment when we realized that we were out of Vietnamese waters. There was a slow ripple effect as everyone realized this. Some of the younger women changed their clothes and dolled up a little. It felt like there was new life on the ship. We all felt hope.
Historical Note:
In 1976, now completely under Communist rule, Vietnam was officially reunited and named the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Those who had held positions in the South Vietnamese government and others who were influential in religious or literary groups were sent to what was called "re-education camps," which were basically hard labor prison camps. Security and censorship were strict with bans on pre-1975 works in the fields of music, art and literature. Churches were all put under the control of the state, and anyone who spoke out was punished severely.
Over one million people secretly escaped Vietnam during the period after the war. Those who went by boat were called Boat People. Many died at sea due to poor quality boats, sea pirates who raped and murdered, bad weather, hunger and thirst. Often refugees were stockpiled in camps in Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, the Philippines and Indonesia for years. Eventually, most of them found asylum in the United States, Canada, Australia, France, West Germany, and Britain. In the 1990s, those who could not find a country that would accept them were deported back to Vietnam.
That evening, there was another scary moment. There was a smaller ship that seemed to be following us. It was going very fast. We didn't know what it was, but we thought that it could be a pirate ship. Suddenly everyone ran downstairs as fast as they could. All the women on the ship were terrified because they had heard stories about Thai pirates who would rob, kill, and rape women who were escaping. We heard stories about women who ripped holes in their clothing and put dirt all over themselves so the pirates wouldn't want them. Slowly we saw the distance between us and the boat getting wider and wider, and then we felt a little more at ease. But at that moment people were preparing for the worst.
The morning of December 24, we saw another boat. Everybody immediately thought, "Oh no, this is it. This is the end for us." Again we thought they were pirates. All the women went under deck. We all prayed. Whatever religion you were, you prayed, and you hoped that this wasn't the end, that there was still something left for us. But seeing that boat chase after us, we were pretty frightened. The boat came right next to our ship. We could see that they were dark people. We didn't know who they were. It turned out that it was a Malaysian fishing vessel. The person manning the ship spoke English. He asked if we needed water. We still had water and were suspicious of their motives, so we said we didn't need any, but when they offered us some fish, we realized that they were honest and good-natured and wanted to help. They told my husband that we were in Malaysian waters, about five or six hours from shore. They confirmed that the route my husband was taking was the right one.
We Arrive in Malaysia
Around 6 in the evening, we started to see the outline of the mountains in Malaysia. Everybody was really happy. We could see the lights on the houses and little mopeds that were driving along the coast. We followed the land, continuing toward shore until we crashed onto the beach. The engine stopped and some of the men jumped off to see how high the water level was. The water came up to their calves. Then there was a scurry of people wanting to jump. My husband was scared that the ship might flip over if everyone jumped out of the boat, so he stopped people from mass jumping and tried to get some order. He wanted all the women with children to get out first. Slowly everyone came out. The water was cold, but we didn't feel anything. When we got on the beach, I said to everybody I saw, "Merry Christmas, Merry Christmas," but they didn't say anything. Do you know why? They were Muslims.
The police gathered us together on the beach. They took a head count and roped us off. We were there for an hour and then took a bus to a location like a military base. We slept outside on a cement floor with tents. They handed everyone pieces of thin plastic. We used two to lie on and two for blankets. It was very cold that night. My husband was off with the other men, figuring out our plan.
When morning came, the authorities gave each of us a small carton of water, a bag of crackers, and either dried raisins or dates. Then we went to a transfer camp for three or four days to wait for the ship to take us to the island of Pulo Bidong. The ship was called the "chicken ship" because it was a cargo ship that carried chickens. Once on the island, we were assigned to a housing complex and waited for the American delegation to complete our paperwork.
We stayed there for seven months. My husband worked in the United Nations Commission, cooked and washed. My children went to learn English. Everybody knew each other, and there were friends from home. In the little laundry area, women would meet and become friends. We lived in what they called the "long house" with a lot of rooms. Two or three families shared a room; each had their own corner. Bathrooms were public. We cooked outside of the house. Life in that camp was basically about waiting to leave.
Classes on Life in America
While we were in the camp, they started to prepare us for life in America. The language and culture classes in Malaysia were a little off, but I didn't realize that until after I had lived in America. The main teacher was Vietnamese, but because they had so many students, they hired Malaysian people to also teach. My teacher was Malaysian. One lesson was about life in Chicago. The teacher kept on saying something about Chicago being "bumper-to-bumper." He couldn't explain what it meant, so I just went with it.
There was another lesson about bridal showers. When I first saw the words bridal shower, I thought it was about a bathing ritual. The bride had to get bathed. The teacher explained that at a bridal shower guests would throw confetti at the bride and groom while they were walking down the aisle. Looking back, I can laugh about our time in Malaysia, but at the time it seemed so overwhelming.
Although the Malaysian people were very kind and took us in, life in the camp was only a little less stifling than prison. I longed to be in America and have a life like my sister's. My sister sent pictures of her life in America. She always looked happy, and she wore nice clothes. There was freedom in America, and you could make an honest living. It seemed like a better life.
We left Malaysia on August 19, 1989, twenty months after we had escaped from Vietnam. Before we left, we had a little party to celebrate. We only had a little soda and cookies that we had around, but it was a big celebration. That night we took a short flight to Singapore, slept at the airport, and then flew from Singapore to Japan the next day. Slowly people parted ways. There were two families that flew to Hawaii. We flew to Seattle and then to Los Angeles. We had all been together and knew each other, but everybody was so happy that they were starting their own lives. None of us was sad.
My Family Arrives in America
We arrived in Los Angeles at night. My relatives came to pick us up at the airport, and as we were driving to their home, I saw all these houses and cars, things we used to see in movies. It was overwhelming. For the first week, we lived with my husband's family. The Catholic Church in Burbank had sponsored my father-in-law and fifteen other families when they came here in 1975, the day Saigon fell. My husband's sisters and brothers joined him in the United States five years later in 1980. It was tough living with my husband's family because although there were three bedrooms, there were a lot of people living there. I felt like a stranger in that home. After one week, we moved into our own apartment.
This was a happy time for my family. We had freedom. For you, freedom doesn't mean much. But for us, it means everything. It didn't matter that we lived in a small apartment or that we had an old car. We had just come from a refugee camp, from nothing, zero. Here we were full of hope. At the beginning, I took things step by step so I wouldn't overwhelm myself. My life was about learning what I needed to survive. After we had been here for three months, my husband and I started adult school to learn English. Within a short time, I learned how to take the bus, how to order food from a fast-food restaurant, and how to use an ATM machine. After a year, I finally figured out how to pump my own gas. My sister-in-law took me to the grocery store and showed me where different foods were located. I remember thinking that the grocery stores here were really big. In Vietnam, the stores were much smaller. We joined the local Catholic Church. It was interesting. Mass was given in three languages: Spanish, English, and Vietnamese. I taught Vietnamese to the children at the church.
The first Vietnamese friend I met here was the janitor of the Jewish temple where I learned English. He was very helpful. He knew that my family had just arrived and we didn't have anything, so he gave us whatever he could: old tables, chairs, pots and pans, stuff that the church was getting rid of. He knew that I didn't know how to drive, so whenever he drove his wife to the market, he would ask me if I needed to go as well. This was very helpful to me. It was hard to go all the way to Chinatown without a car. We are still friends.
After ten months, we moved to Eagle Rock in the eastern part of Los Angeles. We reconnected with the brother of my husband's friend from Vietnam who offered to rent a house to us down the street from where he lived. It was a little more money than we were paying, but I told my husband we had to do this because we needed more space for the family. We didn't have the money, but I said, "Let's just do it."
We had lots of Vietnamese friends who were living in Orange County at the time, and there definitely was a pull to move there, but I thought that if we were going to live in America we needed to live in a diverse area like Eagle Rock, so we could learn the language and culture. After a while, I noticed that Orange County had turned into a party tour where people would have parties all the time. This week one family would have a party and the next week another. It's good to have that, but I wanted some distance. I know people today who can barely speak English because in Orange County everyone speaks Vietnamese. You can go through your whole life and just speak Vietnamese.
My children had an easy time adjusting to life in America. They are more American than Vietnamese. They are fluent in English. They eat American food, like pizza and hamburgers, and they have friends from all over the world: America, the Philippines, China, Mexico, and Vietnam. I think that's great. I want my children to feel comfortable with all cultures. That is part of the beauty of America.
At the same time, I didn't want them to forget their language and culture. That was important to me. I live in America, but I am Vietnamese. Yes, they may be American, but we don't look like the typical Americans. Our eyes and noses are different. If they go back to Vietnam, I want them to be comfortable in their homeland and be able to speak their language and blend in with their people. That is why we speak Vietnamese at home and celebrate Vietnamese holidays. I want my children to know about all the customs and foods that go along with the holidays. For example, on New Year we eat candied fruits, and for Middle Autumn we eat moon cakes.
Working in America
For the first year, I worked at home. My husband helped me. When we got here we were on the welfare program, but the money from the government was not enough, so we had to work. I made pants but specialized in making tricky pockets that not a lot of people have the skills to do. In Vietnam, everyone learns how to sew. I helped support the family as a seamstress for four years while my husband went to school to study computers. When he finished college, he applied for many jobs but couldn't find any in the field. He was so disappointed, but he had to work. He had a friend with a furniture shop who asked him to work as a salesman.
When my husband started working for his friend, I went back to school to study cosmetology. I would have preferred to work with computers as I did in Vietnam, but it would have taken three or four years to complete the necessary classes, and I didn't know if I could even get a job. I had two children, and I needed to make a living. The government paid for me to go to cosmetology school, which was great. After I finished with the program and got my license, I found a job in West Hollywood. I worked there for one and one-half years and then moved to another salon in Glendale. After six months, they closed and asked me to come to the Silver Lake store. That was in 1999, and I've been there ever since. I like my job, but language is still an obstacle. Sometimes I want to tell my customers something, but I don't have the words. I don't know what to do. It's very frustrating.
Changes in Vietnam
After fifteen years, I went back to Vietnam to visit family. I felt like an outsider. I noticed that the streets were busier. There were more motorcycles and pollution. I saw that students still study Marx and Engels. Why do they need this? They need to learn about technology, things that will help them. The education is not good. Schools are free now, but you still have to pay for some things, and if you pay for those things, it's more like a private school. The second time I went back, I went to the villages. I saw people with nothing, mostly old people and children. Those people able to work had moved to the city to find jobs. Before 1975, there were poor and rich but the distance between them was not as great. Poor people at least had a house, work, and food.
Reflections
When we were in Vietnam, we worked to survive. We worked really hard. We worked to have clothes to wear and food to eat. We didn't think about good food like oyster; that wasn't in our minds. We didn't care about beautiful clothes. We just didn't want to be hungry or cold. So when we came here as immigrants, we also worked hard, but for us, that was nothing. We worked six days a week. Some worked seven. We took all the overtime we could get. Maybe that was okay for the first few years when we didn't have anything, but when you have enough, you should set a limit. How many houses and how many cars do you need? I want a simple life. I don't need a castle. I just want a place for my family to live and a car that runs.
In Vietnamese culture, family is the most important thing. Children live with their parents until they are established in a good job. Then they are supposed to take care of their parents when their parents get old. You would never put your aging parents in a nursing home. In fact, nursing homes are nonexistent in Vietnam. I told my children that when I am old, they should put me in a nursing home. I don't want my children to worry about me and my aging issues.
Vietnamese parents are strict with their children. They do not want their children to be out of control. Children have to obey completely even if their parents are wrong. In America, children have too much freedom. Maybe that's because life in America is easier, so they are a little more relaxed. Vietnamese children also have respect for their teachers and do whatever they say. Here there is no real respect for teachers. Students talk in the classroom; some stand up and leave. That would never happen in a Vietnamese classroom. I'm not saying that this is the best thing because the problem with the Vietnamese schools is that even if the teachers are wrong, the students must listen and accept what they say. Here the children have an opportunity to speak out and discuss things, and they learn how to be good public speakers.
There is also a big difference between Vietnamese and American women. In America, women have more freedom and rights. They have a high education and good jobs. They are equal to their husbands. You can't be equal when you're a Vietnamese woman. The man is the head of the household. In America, because of the equal standing, women are not subservient. They feel they have an equal say, and that leads to a higher divorce rate. Once you say, "I'm not taking this anymore," there's an easy divorce. Vietnamese women stay in their marriage no matter what happens. If there are problems in the family, we keep them private. We don't have psychologists. Vietnamese people try and put up a perfect image, a perfect family. The problem is that Vietnamese women have to endure a lot more. If your husband becomes a drunk and beats you, you stay with him. You just don't leave him. Even if he has a girlfriend, you turn your head the other way. That would be unheard of for American women. For them it would be "I'm out of here." I think a combination of both would be better, not be too quick to get a divorce but not staying until you're black and blue. I think things are changing; Vietnamese women are starting to follow the lead of American women. More couples are breaking up.
My big dream is for Vietnam to be free and democratic. I want to see an end to communism, and I want to see the education system improve. I want to build our country as one country. Many Vietnamese organizations and individuals here and around the world are trying to help the people who are living in Vietnam. Some focus on children, others on old people, and others on people with disabilities. Some help everyone. Many people gave to me and my family, and I want to give back to my country. I would like to live part of the year here and part of the year in Vietnam. It depends on my family, of course. If my husband or my children need me, I'll stay here. But my goal is to help rebuild my country.