The speaker, Ms. Susan Phillips, gave a valuable presentation that consists of immigrants' stories. In her book, she was able to tell the stories of women who have immigrated to this country. In addition to her book, she was able to show us visually, through video, the different kinds of women that are represented in her book. In this sense, there is a lot of oral history that foretells the hardships that these women had to face in their life by establishing themselves in a new country. I really connected with Susan's presentation, because being an immigrant myself, from Peru, I feel like I can relate to some of the things that were discussed. For example, one part that really resonated from the presentation is the difficulty in learning English. As a child of 8 years old, it was hard for me to learn English, but I was able to pick it up in elementary and middle school. It was not the same case for my mother, she was not able to have the same experience as me by getting active help in school so it was harder for her to learn the language. Language is definitely a big challenge for immigrants, alongside also leaving your native country, your family, and loved ones. A big difficult process of immigrating to a new country is leaving your native country. For me, it was difficult to leave my country, but as a child I did not have the same memory or connection to my native country as my mother. My mother left her friends, her family, her job, in search for a better future for both of us. By migrating to the United States, she was fighting for a better future for both of us, at a very high cost. Leaving the country that you lived for most of your life, trying to start a new life in a place where you are unfamiliar with the culture and language, must have been really difficult for my mother. I do agree with Susan that immigration is often looked at as statistics in a negative way, but there is a story behind those numbers. People view immigrants negatively, in the context of history where immigrants are viewed only as useful for work. But the reality is that most immigrants are not here to take American jobs, but they are here to give themselves a much better life, in the land of opportunity. Although the process of adapting and living in a new country is difficult, they do it in hope of a better future.